 
1 
 
Multilayer Babinet Metamaterial to Initiate Nonreciprocal Topological Phenomena and 
Generalized Faraday Rotation 
Balázs Bánhelyi1, Miklós Waldhauser2, Virág Szünstein2, Ákos Sebők-Pap2, Olivér Ardelán2, Anna Kőházi-Kis2, 
Dávid Vass2, András Szenes2, David Keene3, Maxim Durach3, Mária Csete2 
1Department of Computational Optimization, University of Szeged, Árpád tér 2, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary; 
2Department of Optics and Quantum Electronics, University of Szeged, Dóm tér 9, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary; 
3Department of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Physics, Georgia Southern University, 301 Veazy Hall, Suite 2000, Statesboro, GA 30458 
Correspondence: mcsete@physx.u-szeged.hu 
Abstract Multilayers of Babinet complementary periodic structures constructed with 
miniarrays of spherical plasmonic nanoresonators were optimized to ensure Generalized 
Faraday Rotation. Nonreciprocal rotation and asymmetric transmission were achieved in 
spectrally overlapping regions due to the reach physics involving (i) symmetry breaking via 
coupled localized modes, (ii) Brillouin zone-folding stemmed from constituent sub-lattices 
forming in-plane twisted coupled loops, (iii) interlayer coupling between Babinet 
complementary patterns. The nanophotonical phenomena include (i) quasi-BIC resonances, (ii) 
hierarchically coupled localized and propagating modes that results in time-periodic Floquet 
modulation, (iii) initialization of synthetic potentials tuneable independently via intra and inter-
layer parameters. The unique bianisotropic composites result in a synthetic vector gauge and 
emulated magnetic field manifesting itself in tilted-precessing magnetic dipoles and the 
accompanying modulation being time-periodic, inherently ensures a synthetic dimension. The 
asymmetric transmission is enhanced in the classical sense along quantized flat bands, and in 
mixed and forward bases inside finite wavelength-and-tilting intervals overlapping with 
nonreciprocal polarization rotation. The transmitted pulse re-shaping proves beating of nearby 
resonant modes, the loss can be compensated with active ad-layers thereby resulting in Faraday 
isolator capability. The multilayers synthetize topological phenomena in high-dimensional 
synthetic parameter spaces. 
Keywords: plasmonics, metamaterials, polarization rotation, asymmetric transmission, 
nonreciprocal, synthetic gauge, Faraday-isolator  
1. Introduction 
Topological phenomena allow tailoring of the dispersion characteristics and to achieve various 
counterpart nanophotonic phenomena via metamaterials [1]. In quantum information 
processing applications desired capabilities are the control of the polarization and intensity, 
with propagation direction selectivity on demand, e.g. to perform Faraday isolation.  
To achieve large transmission in tailorable spectral intervals, electromagnetically induced 
transparency (EIT) like phenomena were primarily proposed. Coupled nanoresonator induced 
transparency (CRIT) can be achieved in case of strong-coupling between modes of different 
complex frequency [2]. A certain degree of detuning is essential to prevent degradation of 
transparency in presence of losses, indicating a trade-off, because of the achievable Q is 
inversely proportional to the [3,4]. The hybridization of plasmons excitable on coupled 
embedded disk and surrounding ring results in Fano lines and the interaction of narrow dark 
and broad bright resonances leads to plasmon induced transparency [5-7]. Hierarchical 
hybridization of localized modes and surface lattice resonances on plasmonic particles forming 
honeycomb pattern results in asymmetric near-field [8]. 
 
2 
 
It is a great challenge to break reciprocity in the far-field responses, e.g. asymmetrical 
transmission can be achieved via bianisotropic metamaterials [9]. For nonreciprocal 
polarization rotation gyromagnetic or gyroelectric materials and Weyl semimetals were 
proposed, however such materials have limited compatibility with QIP elements and are 
difficult to tune their performance even in twisted multilayered configuration [10-13]. 
Metamolecules offer solutions, as the chiral and Tellegen metamaterial elements result in 
polarization dependent, while the omega and artificial moving elements allow for propagation 
direction dependent optical response. When these elements are combined, one has to consider 
that chiral and artificial moving metamaterials are capable of converting the frequency, while 
omega and Tellegen metamaterials modify only the phase [14].  
However, asymmetric transmission with reversed polarization rotation could be realized with 
a very complex 3D metamaterial up until now [15]. In addition, modes supported by complex 
metamaterials are often non-radiative, therefore different methods are necessary to extract light 
in the case of bound-states-in-continuum (BICs) [16]. Coupling of quasi-BIC and scattering 
multipoles allows super-scattering beyond radiation limits, due to the lifted degeneracy 
between poles and zeros allowing for a superdipole emergence [17]. Nonreciprocal 
transmission was achieved via BICs on double layers with vertical mirror symmetry breaking, 
which enables phase inversion (/2) in the -M direction [18]. Metasurfaces that are made of 
ferromagnetic materials and support BIC exhibit strong nonreciprocity and result in Faraday 
rotation due to enhanced magneto-optic effect [19]. The BIC and guided mode resonances can 
be tuned into radiative modes via symmetry breaking and multiple periods induced band 
inversion phenomena and Brillouin-Zone folding with inherited properties revealing their 
predecessors [20]. 
Tailoring the topology of metamaterials has the potential to control the optical response, 
polarization (spin) and to ensure magnet-free nonreciprocity. The chirality of the modes 
excitable on hexagonal plasmonic particle arrays itself results in Berry phase modulation [21]. 
Primary studies revealed that an effective gauge can be initialized by varying the phase 
dynamically on a nanoresonator lattice [22]. Bianisotropic metamaterials acting as photonic 
topological insulators (PTI) were demonstrated that ensure magneto-electric coupling and are 
capable to emulate the spin-orbit coupling [23,24]. 
Such pseudo-spin engineered topological systems rely on anisotropic meta-atoms or co-
existent shrunken and expanded sub-lattices of graphene-like honeycomb hexagonal patterns 
[21-26]. The shrinking and expansion results in band-folding and valleys (pseudo-spins) 
mixing, manifesting itself in four doublet bands [27]. The quality factor of radiative modes can 
be controlled with symmetry breaking phenomena realized via profile engineering, while the 
mode polarization can be tuned continuously by varying the spin-Hall and valley-Hall 
contribution [28,29]. Two-dimensional metasurfaces thereby enable light guiding or radiation 
with a degree controlled by the topology [30]. Topological defects create a cavity, where the 
vanishing phase allows for meeting the quantization condition, which results in appearance of 
equally spaced modes [31]. 
Metamaterials topology offers versatile concepts to achieve nonreciprocal phenomena [32]. 
Accordingly, various (vectorial, scalar, non-Abelian, real and complex, non-Hermitian) gauge 
fields have already been demonstrated in real and synthetic spaces and used in topological 
photonics [33].  
 
3 
 
The EIT-like phenomenon can be converted into nonreciprocal transmission by adding 
temporal modulation to the surface impedance [34]. The valleys degeneracy can be lifted by 
breaking the time-reversal symmetry via time-modulation. The methodology was extensively 
studied during the development of metamaterial counterpart of Floquet photonic topological 
insulators, and it was demonstrated that the counterparts of  gaps are k gaps in PTIs [35,36]. 
A cascaded photonic transition was achieved by modulated refractive index [37]. Floquet 
ladder was demonstrated via electro-optically modulated ring [38]. Complete polarization 
conversion was demonstrated by temporally switching the permittivity and permeability 
between isotropic and anisotropic values [39]. 
In the case of generic space-time variation giant nonreciprocity can be achieved, when the 
modulation speed approaches the speed of waves [40]. The phenomena accompanying the 
simultaneous variation of the permittivity and permeability phased in space and time manifest 
themselves in bianisotropic effective parameters mimicking moving uniaxial media, which 
exhibit the Fresnel drag effect [41,42]. The time-reflection can also be eliminated, when the 
impedance remains constant at the temporal interface and gain is achievable [13,42]. Specific 
examples of space-time modulated materials were thoroughly inspected, and several 
topological phenomena where adopted to metamaterials [43,44]. Traveling wave space-time 
modulation is a considerable option, since it results in magneto-electric coupling and a 
corresponding synthetic magnetic potential [45]. Rotating wave space-time modulation also 
can result in bianisotropic response and in the breaking of time reversal symmetry [46].  
In nonreciprocal bianisotropic metamaterials broadband amplification can be achieved via 
adiabatic space-time modulation [47]. The expansion of the k-gaps via photonic-time crystals 
by using structural resonances was also demonstrated [48]. Recent results show that space-time 
duality manifests itself PTC like phenomena in spatially periodic systems subject of temporal 
modulation and temporal flips induce topological transition [49,50]. Two-coupled non-
Hermitian loops allows for band braiding, when the amplitude and phase is simultaneously 
modulated [51]. Recent studies show that Landau levels are achievable in non-Hermitian type-
II Dirac systems in case of coexistent gauge E and B fields [52]. 
The potential of nonreciprocal phenomena in optical isolation was already demonstrated [53-
56]. To compensate losses in non-Hermitian systems and to ensure sufficiently high 
transmission, metamaterial elements are often combined with active media.  
Topological metamaterials were also applied to tailor lasing and to generate BICs and Dirac-
vortex cavities [57]. To achieve topological-cavity surface emitting laser (TCSEL) a Dirac-
vortex pattern was generated via Kekulé transformation of honeycomb lattices and used also 
for Majorana states and on-chip vector beam tailoring [58,59]. Vectorial vortex thermal light 
was also generated, which originates from BICs, by introducing BZF as a part of topological 
design [60]. 
A metamaterial possessing all these capabilities is an ideal candidate for Faraday isolation. In 
our previous studies we have presented multilayer plasmonic metamaterials, which enable 
asymmetric transmission [61,62]. In present work similar multilayers of Babinet 
complementary periodic convex and concave structures, constructed with complex miniarrays 
of spherical plasmonic nanoresonators, were optimized to achieve nonreciprocal polarization 
rotation beside asymmetric transmission.  
 
4 
 
The key topological as well as near-field and far-field nanophotonic phenomena were identified 
via steady-state and time-domain computations, and the material loss was overcome by adding 
an active cover layer, thereby demonstrating Faraday rotation and isolation capabilities. 
2. Optimization Method 
Multilayer metamaterials were constructed by aligning Babinet complementary subwavelength 
periodic patterns of spherical nanoresonator miniarrays in convex-concave-convex succession. 
The primary spherical nanoresonator and periodic pattern parameters were in accordance with 
our previous studies [61,62]. 
The optimization was performed to achieve the generalized Faraday rotation (GFR) 
phenomenon by illuminating the multilayers with linearly (p-polarized) light. Accordingly, the 
objective function was defined to reach ∑=(forward-forward+backward-backward)~90° cumulative 
polarization rotation, where the polarization ellipses’ orientation corresponding to the 
incoming and outgoing beams is indicated by forward&backward and forward&backward in case of 
forward and backward propagation directions, respectively (schematics in Fig. 1c and Fig. 2c).  
The GFR condition can be fulfilled by meeting the following criteria: (i) the illumination of 
the multilayer is realized with a backward-propagating beam in azimuthal orientation 
corresponding to the outgoing polarization orientation achieved in case of p-polarized light 
illumination with forward propagating beam (backward := forward); (ii) the polarization rotation 
occurs in the same direction in both propagation directions, which means nonreciprocal 
rotation; (iii) the difference of co-polarized transmitted beam intensities – hereinafter referred 
to as asymmetric transmission (AT) - is maximal in the azimuthal orientations meeting the GFR 
criterion (𝐴𝑇௖௢ି௣௢௟௔௥௜௭௘ௗ
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ / ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟ = 𝐴𝑇௖௢ି௣௢௟௔௥௜௭௘ௗ
௠௜௫௘ௗ / ௙௢௥௪௔௥ௗ ௕௔௦௘௦ =|Tco-polarized_forward-Tco-polarized_backward| := 
maximal); which implies that (iv) the transmitted intensity approaches unity (could be achieved 
only via non-lossy media) /vanishes in one /opposite propagation directions (Tco-polarized_forward 
/Tco-polarized_backward := maximal /minimal or minimal /maximal); as well as (v) the ellipticity of 
outgoing beams approaches zero. The applied multilayer is plasmonic, so an upper threshold 
exists for the achievable transmittance. In addition, ensuring completely linearly polarized 
beam propagation throughout such metamaterial of unique symmetry properties is challenging.  
Therefore, the polarization ellipses were evaluated based on the Stokes parameters to determine 
the polarization rotation and ellipticity using the method described in our previous studies 
[61,62] (for more detail see Supporting Information). 
To optimize and thereafter to evaluate the capabilities of the designed multilayers, the 
polarization-selective readout of the COMSOL Multiphysics RF module was used, and the co-
polarized and cross-polarized transmitted signals were extracted, while the dissipative loss was 
determined based on resistive heating of the plasmonic components made of gold. The 
optimization was performed by GLOBAL algorithm implemented into COMSOL Multiphysics 
software [63]. In addition to the symmetrically varied distance between the composing layers, 
the azimuthal orientation was also varied during p-polarized light illumination in forward 
propagation direction (f) and was inherited in backward propagation direction (b) according 
to the polarization rotation occurring in forward direction.  
 
5 
 
Based on the literature such bianisotropic artificial metamaterials result in asymmetric optical 
responses, while for the achievement of nonreciprocity an important criterion is the asymmetry 
of the co-polarized transmission [9].  
Accordingly, the co-polarized components of the transmission were determined and compared 
in the azimuthal orientations corresponding to f and b, so as by defining the 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟ for 
specific azimuthal orientations in forward and backward propagation directions in the classical 
sense: 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ೑ and 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ್= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ್−𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ್, where indices “f” 
and “b” always refer to forward and backward propagation direction, respectively.  
Assuming that the nonreciprocal rotation is accompanied by asymmetric transmission in both 
involved propagation directions, the cumulative impact of bianisotropy was considered by 
computing the balanced asymmetrical transmission in mixed bases: 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−
𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ್. To achieve GFR configurations, during the primary optimizations, the following 
complex objective function was examined, which includes terms related to the balanced 
asymmetrical co-polarized transmission, as well as rotation and ellipticity (τ) at the 
transmission sides: OPT-FOM= 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ/(|90°-|(b-b)+(f-f)|| × (|f|+ |b|)). Thereafter 
during comparison of the optical responses of distinctly different optimized multilayers 
(Pattern-I and Pattern-II), the GFR-FOM= |𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ| ∙
ଵ
|ଽ଴°ି∑||ାଵ spectra were also 
determined, and the reminiscent ellipticity was evaluated separately, considering that ellipticity 
on the minimal transmission side does not have an impact on the GFR performance. 
Though the OPT-FOM can yield multilayers exhibiting nonreciprocal rotation, the 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ 
quantity approaches zero, when the forward /backward propagation allows for small 
transmission and the backward /forward propagation predominantly results in a cross-polarized 
component. Therefore, the differential asymmetrical transmission (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟) in forward 
bases was also monitored, which is the difference of the co-polarized component in forward 
propagation direction and the transmission in backward propagation direction projected onto 
the 
cross-polarized 
component 
of 
forward 
direction 
(𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−
𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
~𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ം೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
). The GFI-FOM constructed with this quantity was also 
evaluated (GFI-FOM = 
ଵ
(்೑ೠ೗೗
೑_ം೑ାଵ)
ଵ
(ଵି்೑ೠ೗೗→೎ೝ೚ೞೞ
ം್→ ം೑
)ାଵ∙
ฬ்೑ೠ೗೗
೑_ം೑ି்೑ೠ೗೗→೎ೝ೚ೞೞ
ം್→ ം೑
ฬ
|ଽ଴°ି∑||ାଵ
∙
ଵ
|ఛ೑|ା|ఛ್|ାଵ) for the 
optimized multilayers. About further details on corresponding cross-polarized spectra and 
FOMs, please see the Supporting Information. To catch the tiny asymmetric transmission, it is 
straightforward to consider the wavelength dependency of the forward outgoing and backward 
incoming azimuthal orientation, which is experimentally challenging, therefore the optical 
responses in  configuration are presented in the Supporting Information. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1 Parameters of the optimized multilayers 
The primary miniarray was constructed with a central nanoring of R=25 nm radius with 
embedded central nano-disk/hole of 5 nm radius in the concave/convex monolayer, which was 
surrounded by satellite nanocrescents of r=12.5 nm, aligned along a circular quadrumer of 
=100 nm radius. These nano-objects have perimeters of (10; 25; 50; 200)×π.  
 
6 
 
The centered rectangular pattern with a unit cell of px/y=300/173 nm side-lengths could be 
fabricated using integrated colloid sphere and interference lithography, due to its large degrees 
of freedom [64-66]. However, in this case the quadrumer is slightly rotated (~96°) and the 
nanocrescents are misaligned compared to the horizontal direction (=106°). These parameters 
were inherited during the optimization of the presented multilayers. Important inherited 
spectral and topological properties are that (i) the resonance wavelength of the nanoring and 
nanocrescent (nanocrescent and propagating plasmon polaritons) differs by ~10 nm in U/C and 
C/U resonance, developing if the E-field is oriented along the axis and tip on the 
convex/concave layer (in case of coupled U resonance on the concave layer if the E-field is 
oriented along the tip); (ii) there are two sub-lattices (A with and B without nanoring). The 
(i/ii) facilities symmetry breaking /period doubling type perturbations [20]. 
The optimization performed by using the OPT-FOM resulted in two very similar multilayers 
that meet the GFR criterion. Namely Pattern-I and Pattern-II, which are constructed with 
dielectric spacers of hdiel_I=23.92 nm and hdiel_II=23.95 nm that correspond to hmultilayer_I=164.84 
nm and hmultilayer_II=164.9 nm complete sub-wavelength slab thicknesses. Although it is 
counterintuitive considering the minor difference between the multilayers’ parameters, the 
optical and near-field responses differ characteristically (data are presented in Table S1 in 
Supporting Information). This is due to the different configurations involving the azimuthal 
orientation in both propagation directions, and indicates that the interplay between the (i) and 
(ii) type perturbations provides dual-solutions.  
3.2 Optical responses of Pattern-I and Pattern-II under linearly polarized light 
illumination in backward propagation direction 
In Pattern-I the ∑=-89.08° cumulative rotation is reached at GFR=637.45 nm, when linearly 
polarized light illumination is realized both in forward_GFR=95.39° and backward_GFR=120.1° 
azimuthal orientations (Fig. 1a-c). This GFR configuration results in smaller forwardforward=-
24.67° rotation in forward propagation direction, while approximately two-times larger 
backwardbackward =-64.41° rotation is achieved in backward propagation direction. In Pattern-
II the cumulative rotation of ∑=93.66° slightly more pronouncedly mismatches the target 
polarization rotation value at GFR=637.22 nm.  
Counterintuitively, the slightly different spacer allows for meeting the GFR condition in very 
similar forward_GFR=95.23°, but in fundamentally different backward_GFR=65.62° azimuthal 
orientations in the forward and backward propagation direction (Fig. 2a-c). The same signs of 
the  orientation differences in opposite propagation directions prove that both GFR 
configurations result in nonreciprocal polarization rotation (Fig. 1a and Fig. 2a).  
The co-polarized transmission is weakly dependent on the propagation direction in these 
azimuthal orientations, accordingly small 𝐴𝑇௙௢௥௪௔௥ௗ
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑=9.5×10-6 and 𝐴𝑇௕௔௖௞௪௔௥ௗ
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ್=1.8×10-5 
classical asymmetrical transmission values are reached in Pattern-I (Fig. 1b). Pattern-II shows 
more propagation direction dependent transmission and significantly and slightly larger 
classical asymmetrical transmission of 𝐴𝑇௙௢௥௪௔௥ௗ
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑=5.5×10-5 and 𝐴𝑇௕௔௖௞௪௔௥ௗ
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑=2.5×10-5 in 
forward and backward propagation direction (Fig. 2b). This is because the transmission is very 
low in both propagation directions revealing a non-radiative, i.e. BIC-related phenomenon [15-
20].  
 
7 
 
Moreover, the classical 𝐴𝑇௙௢௥௪௔௥ௗ/௕௔௖௞௪௔௥ௗ
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟௖_ఊ೑/ఊ್
 exhibits a global /local minimum at the 
GFR=637.45 nm in forward /backward propagation directions in Pattern-I and a local minimum 
at the GFR=637.22 nm in both propagation directions in Pattern-II.  
Figure 1. Optical responses of Pattern-I, transmission side. (a, d) Co-polarized transmission and polarization rotation in 
forward and backward propagation direction as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward cross-polarized 
component, (b, e) cumulative rotation and the classical, balanced and differential co-polarized asymmetric transmission 
(triangular symbols indicate regions, where the backward transmission is larger), (c, f) ellipticity of outgoing beams, GFR-
FOM and GFI-FOM. (a-c) Linearly, (d-f) elliptically polarized light for backward illumination. Insets: (c) the schematic of the 
studied multilayer indicating its geometrical parameters and the illumination directions, (f) the polarization ellipses 
corresponding to the forward incoming (bottom left) and outgoing (top left), backward incoming (top right) and outgoing 
(bottom right) plane waves. 
The balanced asymmetrical transmission takes on more than two-orders of magnitude larger 
(𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ=2.2×10-3) value in the mixed bases in Pattern-I close to a local maximum, 
revealing capability for propagation direction dependent transmission, when the GFR condition 
is met (Fig. 1b). In Pattern-II a global maximum develops in the balanced asymmetrical 
transmission close to the GFR condition, which allows for slightly larger value of 
𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ=2.4×10-3, and thus predicts more well-defined nonreciprocal phenomena (Fig. 2b). 
Indeed, the differential transmission in the forward bases, indicating the difference between the 
co-polarized transmission in the forward direction and the backward propagating transmission 
projected onto the cross-polarized component in forward propagation direction, is one more 
order of magnitude larger (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 1.14×10-2) compared to the backward bases in 
Pattern-I close to a local maximum (Fig. 1b). In Pattern-II even larger (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 
1.28×10-2) differential transmission is reached close to a larger local maximum (Fig. 2b). The 
outgoing beams show ellipticity of f=17.52° and b=5.92° in the forward and backward 
propagation direction in Pattern-I (Fig. 1c, 1f inset). In Pattern-II the ellipticity is slightly more 
pronounced (f=20.09°) in forward direction, while approximates the linearly polarized case in 
backward propagation direction (b=-1.48°, Fig. 2c, 2f inset). In both cases, the coincidence of 
GFR with narrow and broadband modulation in forward and backward ellipticity is observable. 
3.3 Optical responses considering the forward outgoing ellipticity in backward 
propagation direction through optimized layers Pattern-I and Pattern-II 
 
8 
 
Figure 2. Optical responses of Pattern-II, transmission side. (a, d) Co-polarized transmission and polarization rotation in 
forward and backward propagation direction as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward cross-polarized 
component, (b, e) cumulative rotation and the classical, balanced and differential co-polarized asymmetric transmission 
(triangular symbols indicate regions, where the backward transmission is larger), (c, f) ellipticity of outgoing beams, GFR-
FOM and GFI-FOM. (a-c) Linearly, (d-f) elliptically polarized light for backward illumination. Insets: (c) the schematic of the 
studied multilayer indicating its geometrical parameters and the illumination directions, (f) the polarization ellipses 
corresponding to the forward incoming (bottom left) and outgoing (top left), backward incoming (top right) and outgoing 
(bottom right) plane waves. 
When the ellipticity of the outgoing beam in forward propagation direction is considered for, 
namely the beam illuminating the Pattern-I multilayer in backward propagation direction is 
imparted by elliptical polarization of f=17.52°, the outgoing beam shows slightly smaller 
backwardbackward =-63.95° rotation, accordingly the cumulative rotation is also slightly smaller 
(∑=-88.63°), however the resulted b=2.99° ellipticity becomes advantageously smaller (Fig. 
1d-f). Pattern-II also meets the GFR criterion less perfectly, when the illumination in backward 
propagation direction is realized with a beam of elliptical polarization (f=20.09°). This is 
because the outgoing beam shows slightly larger backwardbackward =65.43° rotation, 
accordingly the cumulative rotation is also slightly larger (∑=95.04°), though the ellipticity is 
further reduced to the value of b=-1.07° (Fig. 2d-f). 
Both the balanced (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ=3.32×10-3) and differential (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 1.49×10-2) 
asymmetric transmission values become larger in Pattern-I, due to that the local maximum is 
transformed into a global maximum and the local maximum is enhanced (Fig. 1e). Further 
enhanced balanced global (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ=4.5×10-3) and differential local (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 
1.64×10-2) maximal asymmetric transmission values are reached in Pattern-II, when elliptically 
polarized light is used in backward propagation direction (Fig 2e). The counterpart AT values 
are larger in Pattern-II. Moreover, both FOMs qualifying the GFR and GFI capability become 
larger at the global (GFR-FOM=1.15×10-3 < 1.40×10-3) and local (GFI-FOM= 1.22×10-4 < 
1.47×10-4) maximum in Pattern-I (Fig. 1c-to-f). Similarly, enhanced FOMs are achieved in 
Pattern-II, the only difference is that in GFR-FOM a smaller local maximum is enhanced (GFR-
FOM=5.16×10-4 < 7.44×10-4), while a nearby smaller local maximum is transformed into a 
global maximum in GFI-FOM (GFI-FOM= 6.09×10-5 < 6.16×10-5) (Fig. 2c-to-f).  
 
9 
 
All merits are better for Pattern-II, except the meeting of the ∑=90° GFR criterion, 
consequently the GFR-FOM and GFI-FOM are also smaller, in addition the ellipticity reached 
in forward propagation direction remains larger (Fig. 1-to-2).  
The optical responses determined in case of linear and elliptical illumination for the cross-
polarized components both in wavelength independent (Fig. S1a-f and Fig. S2a-f) and in  
configuration (Fig. S1m-r and Fig. S2m-r) as well as for the co-polarized component in  
configuration (Fig. S1g-l and Fig. S2g-l) are presented in the Supporting Information (Table 
S1). 
3.4 Dispersion characteristic of Pattern-I and Pattern-II 
Figure 3. Dispersion characteristic of classical co-polarized asymmetric transmission and non-reciprocal rotations of Pattern-
I. (a, d) Classical co-polarized asymmetric transmission with fitted plasmonic branches (indicated with dots), (b, e) polarization 
rotation (c, f) ellipticity; in (a-c) forward and (d-f) backward propagation direction. 
The dispersion characteristics of the convex and concave monolayers were already presented 
in our previous papers [61,62]. The dispersion maps of the concave monolayer taken in =90° 
azimuthal orientation (-Y direction of the centred rectangular unitcell) indicate 
complementary localized modes as well as scattered photonic modes (Surface Lattice 
Resonance) and SPPs coupled in (-1,0) order that branch extends towards the wavelength 
region of <600 nm at the  point. The strong-coupling with spectrally overlapping localized 
modes resonant on the nanoring and nanocrescents form Fano lines at perpendicular incidence. 
The intuitive expectation is that the impact of these phenomena is inherited by the multilayers 
as well, by contributing to the symmetry breaking perturbations [20]. 
For Pattern-I and Pattern-II, the co-polarized and cross-polarized transmission components 
were mapped separately (for the direct co-polarized and cross-polarized components see 
Supporting Information  Fig. S3a,b,d,e; Fig. S4a,b,d,e). On the dispersion maps of the co-
polarized and cross-polarized transmittance in the azimuthal orientations of forward_GFR_I/II 
(95.39° /95.23°) and backward_GFR_I/II (120.1° /65.62°), the GFR phenomenon appears in the 
region where predominantly global transmission minima appear inside a gap above inverted 
bands.  
 
10 
 
Figure 4. Dispersion characteristic of classical co-polarized asymmetric transmission and non-reciprocal rotations of Pattern-
II. (a, d) Classical co-polarized asymmetric transmission with fitted plasmonic branches (indicated with dots), (b, e) 
polarization rotation (c, f) ellipticity; in (a-c) forward and (d-f) backward propagation direction. 
Exceptional is the cross-polarized transmittance in the backward propagation configuration, 
which shows the GFR at the boundary of a pass-band in both multilayers of Pattern-I and 
Pattern-II (see Supporting Information Fig. S3e and Fig. S4e). 
The classical asymmetric co-polarized and cross-polarized transmission show maxima on two 
continuous and four less well-defined broken quantized flat bands in both propagation 
directions, which show left-right asymmetry around perpendicular incidence, namely more 
pronounced intersecting bands appear with left /right-tilting along the k-axis in Pattern-I/II (Fig. 
3a,d; Fig. 4a,d and Fig. S3c,f; Fig. S4c, f). These ladder-like quantized flat bands reveal a co-
existent space-time-modulations on the hierarchical topology [31,37,38,47]. The regions where 
global maxima of significantly larger 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑/ఊ್ values are taken, appear in considerably 
red-shifted interval (~680 nm /650 nm for Pattern-I/II) close to perpendicular incidence /at 
small tilting in both propagation directions (Fig. 3a,d and Fig. 4a,d).  
The band structure is governed by Brillouin zone-folding and band inversion due to the period 
doubling perturbation stem from co-existent A and B sub-lattices (Supporting Information Fig. 
S3a,b,d,e and Fig. S4a,b,d,e) [20,27,60]. The nonreciprocal phenomenon related space-time 
modulation justifies the use of specific retrieval methods, however these are not accurate 
exactly at the spectral location of the modulation [49,50,67]. Therefore, the branches 
determined by considering the dispersion (wavelength dependent optical properties) of the 
effective medium as well as the azimuthal orientations corresponding to forward and backward 
propagation directions of the GFR configurations, were fitted only to the 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟ maps (Fig. 
3a,d and Fig. 4a,d, for retrieved optical parameters please see Supporting Information Fig. 
S9a,b and Fig. S10a,b) [66]. On the 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟ dispersion maps modulations appear in the 
region of (+/-1,0) grating coupling of plasmonic modes, on both patterns in both propagation 
directions (Fig. 3a,d and Fig. 4a,d). The impact of (-2, 0) SPP band is more noticeable in both 
propagation directions for Pattern-I (Fig. 3a). In addition, steeper branches intersect the 
quantized flat bands, which have pronounced impact on polarization rotation. 
 
11 
 
The GFR corresponds to local maxima in the 𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑/ఊ್ at perpendicular incidence in 
both azimuthal orientations of Pattern-I, and the regions, where significantly larger 
𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ೑/ఊ್ values are taken, appear at large right /left tilting  and small left /right tilting 
in forward  and backward propagation direction in Pattern-I/II (Fig. S1b and Fig. S3c,f; Fig. 
S2b and Fig. S4c,f).  
The difference in Pattern-II compared to Pattern-I is that the 𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟ value is slightly smaller 
/larger in forward /backward propagation direction at perpendicular incidence and the 
intermediately red-shifted global maximum appearing (slightly above 650 nm at small tilting) 
in backward propagation direction is broader in wavelength but narrower in tilting. The 
wavelength and tilting parameter interval, where large values are taken, is complementary in 
the sense that indicates reversed side-preference in Pattern-I and Pattern-II, in both propagation 
directions (Fig. S3c,f to Fig. S4c,f). 
Figure 5. Dispersion characteristic of co-polarized asymmetric transmissions and cumulative rotation and FOMs qualifying 
both propagation directions in GFR configuration and proving non-reciprocity of Pattern-I. (a) Balanced and (b) differential 
co-polarized AT, (c) cumulative rotation, (d) GFR-FOM, (e) GFI-FOM, (f) evaluation-web. 
The modulations in rotation and ellipticity in forward propagation direction are less well 
defined and appear along a flat band bounded by the branches related to the (-1,0) SLR and 
SPP band well-known from the studies of monolayers in -Y direction, in accordance with that 
the azimuthal orientation offorward_GFR_I/II (95.39°/95.23°) is close to 90° (Fig. 1a,c and 3b,c; 
Fig. 2a,c and 4b,c) [61,62]. In backward propagation direction the plane of incidence along 
backward_GFR_I/II=120.1°/65.62° is parallel to the downward /upward diagonal of the unit cells in 
real space, which allows for perturbation due to the folded bands in the rotation and ellipticity 
of both patterns (Fig. 3e,f and Fig. 4e,f). The branches, which originate from Brillouin zone-
folding along the diagonals, intersect a flat band extending up to perpendicular incidence at the 
GFR wavelength. These Brillouin zone-folding related perturbations play unambiguously 
important role in the polarization modulation (Fig. 3e,f and Fig. 4e,f). The polarization 
characteristics also exhibit six-fold ladder revealing a time-periodic modulation, which is 
spectrally slightly shifted to those on the classical asymmetric transmission dispersion maps.  
 
12 
 
However, the GFR related miniband is coincident almost with the minimum at the boundary 
of a differential pass-band of 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ taken in the mixed bases, which is weaker in Pattern-
I and stronger in Pattern-II (Fig. 1b and Fig. 2b, Fig. 5a, Fig. 6a). These balanced asymmetrical 
transmission pass-bands are inherently perturbed by strong tilted branches appearing in the 
mixed bases, which are also related to the Brillouin zone-folding due to the co-existent two 
sub-lattices [20,27,60]. The GFR appears close to the spectral region, where the 𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ 
shows a global maximum, at the upper boundary of a strong differential pass-band (Fig. S5a, 
Fig. S6a). This is evidently due to the pass-band appearing in the cross-polarized transmittance 
in backward propagation direction (Fig. S3e, Fig. S4e). In accordance with the larger red-
shifted global maximum (appearing above 650 nm), the value taken at the GFR is also larger 
in Pattern-II.  
Figure 6. Dispersion characteristic of co-polarized asymmetric transmissions and cumulative rotation and FOMs qualifying 
both propagation directions in GFR configuration and proving non-reciprocity of Pattern-II. (a) Balanced and (b) differential 
co-polarized AT, (c) cumulative rotation, (d) GFR-FOM, (e) GFI-FOM, (f) evaluation-web. 
The more pronounced difference between the dispersion maps of the co-polarized transmission 
in the forward direction and the backward propagating transmission projected onto the cross-
polarized component in forward propagation direction results in a narrow miniband of local 
maxima in the differential asymmetrical transmission (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟) at the GFR in both 
Patterns (Fig. 1b and Fig. 2b; Fig. 5b and Fig. 6b). This is limited by the extension in tilting 
and wavelength of the backward transmission band projected onto the forward cross-polarized 
component in Pattern-I and Pattern-II (Fig. 5b, Fig. S3a-to-5c; Fig. 6b, Fig. S4a-to-6c). While 
in Pattern-I this local 𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟ maximum is centred nearby the GFR wavelength, in 
Pattern-II just the side band of a larger but pronouncedly red-shifted local maximum overlaps 
with the GFR condition at perpendicular incidence (Fig. 1b and Fig. 2b; Fig. 5b and Fig. 6b).  
The 𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟ is predominantly determined by the backward transmission band projected 
onto the co-polarized component in Pattern-I and Pattern-II, rather than limited by the 
extension of cross-polarized transmittance in tilting and wavelength (Fig. S5b, Fig. S3b-to-5f; 
Fig. S6b, Fig. S4b-to-6f).  
 
13 
 
The GFR is coincident with the centre of the global minimum of the transmission projected 
onto the co-polarized component in both Patterns (Fig. S1b and Fig. S2b; Fig. S5b and Fig. 
S6b). 
In accordance with the well-defined global maximum-minimum and minimum-maximum pairs 
appearing as a function of the wavelength in backward rotation, counterpart extrema develop 
in the ∑ of Pattern-I and Pattern-II, throughout finite, but almost tilting independent bands 
close to perpendicular incidence (Fig. 1b, 3e, 5c and Fig. 2b, 4e, 6c). Remarkable difference is 
that the order of extrema is different in the two optimized patterns and is in accordance with 
the usual resonance phenomena related phase shifts in Pattern-II. The results of extended 
parametric studies indicate that the nonreciprocal phenomena might result in 90° cumulative 
polarization rotation in different spectral intervals, which overlap with regions, where both the 
balanced and the differential asymmetric co-polarized transmission are significant.  
Therefore, good differential co-polarrized AT is achievable, even though the azimuthal 
orientations corresponding to the configurations meeting the GFR criterion are not 
accompanied by large classical asymmetric transmission (Fig. 5a-c and Fig. 6a-c). The 
achieved GFR performance is governed by the degree of overlap between the AT bands and 
polarization rotation. As a result, narrow band of local maxima appears on all monitored FOMs 
close to the GFR in both Patterns (Fig. 1c,f and Fig. 5d,e; Fig. 2c,f and Fig. 6d,e, see Supporting 
Information Fig. S1c,f and Fig. S5d,e; Fig. S2c,f and Fig. S6d,e). Although, there are regions, 
where the FOMs take on larger values, these are not coincident with locations, where 
simultaneously larger AT and better meeting of the GFR condition occurs, as compared to 
perpendicular incidence.  
In Pattern-I the GFR configuration corresponds unambiguously to the global optimum in GFR-
FOM at perpendicular incidence, moreover it corresponds to the global maximum through wide 
parameter regions, larger values are taken only at large tilting (Fig. 1c,f and Fig. 5d). In 
comparison, in Pattern-II the appearance of a red-shifted global maximum predicts the 
existence of a configuration operable in different wavelength interval at intermediate tilting 
(Fig. 2c,f and Fig. 6d), moreover, a wide band of maxima appears through intermediate tilting 
at slightly larger wavelength. The GFI-FOM maps show local maxima at the GFR along similar 
discontinuous bands (Fig. 1c,f, 5e and Fig. 2c,f, 6e). The overall performance is very similar 
in Pattern-I and Pattern-II (Fig. 5f and Fig. 6f; Fig. S5f and Fig. S6f). 
3.5 Impact of tilting 
Considering that the asymmetric transmission is achieved in well-defined flat bands through 
intermediate tilting, the sensitivity of the GFR configuration to the angle of incidence was 
inspected. Small tilting was found to be advantageous in both patterns. Moreover, better 
meeting of the GFR condition (∑=89.92°) was possible at 2.5° in Pattern-I, where the 
asymmetric transmission both in the mixed and forward bases (ATcobalanced and ATcodifferential) 
was larger, the ellipticity was smaller in both propagation directions, which allowed for 
reaching larger FOMs (Fig. S7a-c).  
In contrast, in the case of Pattern-II tilting caused weaker matching of the GFR condition, only 
the balanced and differential AT and the ellipticity in forward direction could be improved, 
proving the ultimate advantage of perpendicular incidence for either tilting sides (Fig. S8a-c). 
All these features reveal that quasi-BICs govern the achievable AT in both Patterns.  
 
14 
 
The side-dependent impact of tilting was also inspected, and well defined difference was found 
in case of Pattern-I, which exhibits different enhanced FOM maxima at similar tilting, while 
similar sole global maximum appears at perpendicular incidence in Pattern-II independent of 
tilting-side (see Supporting Information Fig. S7 and Fig. S8 for more detail). 
3.6 Propagation direction dependent effective optical properties of the multilayer 
Primarily a standard metamaterial retrieval method was used to determine the effective optical 
properties of the complete multilayer in case of linearly polarized illumination [68]. 
Considering that there are discontinuities in the effective parameters of time-modulated and 
equivalent bianisotropic materials, we used these retrieval results to demonstrate strong 
dispersion in bands surrounding the GFR spectral region [67].  
The effective parameters of Pattern-I and Pattern-II show overlapping electric and magnetic 
resonances in the vicinity of GFR phenomenon. The narrow bandwidth of the imaginary part 
reveals a BIC-related resonance, which is accompanied by a steep modification of the real part 
in the permittivity and permeability, as well as in the index of refraction (Fig. S9a,b; Fig. S10a, 
b). The modulation is slightly stronger in the forward, compared to the backward propagation 
direction; and in case of Pattern-I compared to Pattern-II. The index of refraction is smaller 
/larger than unity and the imaginary part indicates similarly strong absorption in the forward 
propagation direction, while the index of refraction is intermediate in backward propagation 
direction and the imaginary part proves moderate loss in Pattern-I/II. The imaginary parts 
correlate with the smaller absorption, which allows for higher transmittance in backward 
direction. 
Both the Tellegen and chirality parameters exhibit well-defined extrema at the spectral location 
of polarization rotation and the absolute values of both are larger in Pattern-I, except the 
imaginary part of the Tellegen [69]. Namely, the absolute values of Tellegen and chirality 
parameters are slightly different, except the real part of chirality, which is an order of 
magnitude larger in Pattern-I both in forward and backward propagation directions (Fig. S9c, 
Fig. S10c). Considering that for linearly polarized illumination all asymmetrical transmissions 
as well as the rotation (except for linearly polarized illumination in backward direction) are 
larger in Pattern-II, correlation holds only for the rotation and the imaginary part of the Tellegen 
factor in forward direction, when Pattern-I and Pattern-II is compared. This indicates that the 
multilayers are endowed with all possible characteristic of bianisotropic materials (Fig. S9c; 
Fig. S10c). 
Finally, the refractive index matrix method was used to qualify the effective properties, which 
proved that all of the Tellegen, artificial moving, chirality and omega parameters are uniquely 
modulated at the GFR, based on these the multilayer is an unconventional bianisotropic 
material (Fig. S9f, Fig. S10f) [68,69]. The nonreciprocal responses are governed by extended 
topological phenomena rather than simply by metamolecule related bianisotropic composition. 
In addition, the bounding convex layers are impacted by the bulk dielectric environment, which 
justifies consideration of SLR phenomena as well. 
3.7 Near-field phenomena 
Charge distribution: When the multilayer is illuminated in =0° /90° azimuthal orientation the 
cv (cx) /cx (cv) composing monolayers resonate in C (U) type modes.  
 
15 
 
These principal orientations were inspected in more detail in our previous studies [61,62,64-
66], for periodic patterns constructed with individual objects in monolayers. The 
counterintuitive near-field phenomena, especially the reversal rotation on the nano-objects 
composing the miniarray, is observable already on the monolayers weakly (pronouncedly) in 
forward (backward) azimuthal orientation of GFR configuration.  
Namely, in forward configuration the rotation is counter-clockwise on all constituents, except 
on the lower (#3&4, see insets in Fig. 7m and Fig. 8m) nanocrescents in the miniarray. In 
backward configuration, the rotation remains counter-clockwise /clockwise and clockwise 
/counter-clockwise rotation on the nanoring and nanocrescent in Pattern-I/II, when the 
miniarray is constructed (please see Fig. S11a-f and Video S1 and Video S2; Fig. S12a-f, and 
Video S7 and Video S8 in the Supporting Information).  
The near-field studies revealed that different modes play an important role in the GFR 
phenomenon at the spectrally overlapping nonreciprocal rotation and asymmetrical 
transmission on the dispersion characteristics (Fig. 7a,b,d,e & Video 1-4, and Fig. 8a,b,d,e & 
Video 5-8). In GFR configurations the reversal charge rotation on the nanoring and 
nanocrescents is preserved, however, the dominance of this depends on the propagation 
direction and on the optimized multilayer composition. The characteristic in forward 
propagation direction is very similar for the two patterns, while in backward propagation 
direction the rotation direction on the nanorings is opposite. In forward propagation direction 
on the Pattern-I (Pattern-II) the charge rotation on the nanorings is counter-clockwise, except 
the incoming convex layer, where flipping occurs; while on the nanocrescents the rotation is 
synchronously counter-clockwise, except the entering concave surfaces, where clockwise 
charge rotation is noticeable.  
In backward propagation direction on the Pattern-I (Pattern-II) the charge rotation on the 
nanorings is counter-clockwise (clockwise), except the incoming convex layer, where 
clockwise (counter-clockwise) rotation occurs; while on the nanocrescents the rotation is 
synchronous, except the #1&2 and #4 (#2 and #3&4) crescents on the entering and leaving 
concave surfaces (Fig. 7a,d & Video 1, 2 and Fig. 8a,d & Video 5, 6).  
Both patterns exhibit more pronounced reversal rotation on the nanoring and nanocrescents in 
backward propagation direction, where larger polarization rotation occurs and larger classical 
asymmetric transmission is achieved (except the 𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟ in backward propagation direction 
in case of linearly polarized illumination of Pattern-II). The reversal rotation on half of the 
nanocrescents on the entering concave surface correlates with moderate nonreciprocity in 
Pattern-I, while the appearance of reversal rotation on half of the nanocrescents on the leaving 
concave surface indicates slightly stronger capability for nonreciprocal phenomena in Pattern-
II. This is due to the better phase coverage of reversal rotations, considering the continuous 
charge rotation on the nanoring on the leaving surface.  
In addition, reversal rotation is observable on the concave layer between the A and B sub-
lattices, except the entering surfaces in backward propagation direction in Pattern-I/-II, where 
a well-defined phase-delay develops between counter-clockwise / clockwise rotations, and on 
the leaving surface in Pattern-II, where the clockwise rotations are almost synchronous in the 
sub-lattices (Fig. 7a,d & Video 1, 2 and Fig. 8a,d & Video 5, 6; see Supporting Information 
Fig. S11 g-j & Video S3-S6 and Fig. S12 & Video S9-S12).  
 
16 
 
Remarkable difference is that Pattern-I/II operates with reversal /phase-shifted rotations in the 
A and B-sub-lattices acting as coupled loops.  
The rotation on distinctly different A and B sub-lattices makes these structures suitable to 
achieve time-periodic Floquet modulation that serves as a synthetic dimension along the 
frequency axis, which is the precondition of to generate quantized photonic Landau levels and 
to realize photonic Landau-Zener tunnelling, as well as to achieve band braiding [33,38,51,52]. 
Figure 7. Near-field phenomena of Pattern-I. (a, d) Charge distribution on consecutive layer surfaces (Video 1, 2), (b, e) 
magnetic field (yellow), displacement current (blue) and vorticity distribution on entering and leaving concave surfaces (Video 
3, 4), (c, f) |Ez| on convex and |Bz| on concave entering and leaving surfaces, (g, h, i, j) |Bz| on vertical cross-sections through 
A-B sub-lattices, with schematics on the left side; a, b, c, g, h/d, e, f, i, j) forward /backward propagation direction. Emulated 
magnetic field related pm dynamics on Pattern-I. (k) pxy, (l) pz, (m) inclination, (n) amplitude (please note the existence of 
offset). Inset on (m) segment: multi-unitcell schematic figure in the xy-plane, indicating the A and B sub-lattices. 
The orientation of the charge distribution is predominantly along backward_I=120.1° (backward_II 
65.62°) on the entering concave surface of the Pattern-I (Pattern-II), when they are illuminated 
in backward direction by linearly /elliptically polarized beams with E-field oscillation /main 
axis corresponding to the outgoing beams in forward propagation direction (backward_I := 
forward_I=-30.06° and backward_II := forward_II=24.38°). The distinctly different near-field 
dynamics is governed predominantly by the modes excited directly via light illuminating the 
entering sides with E-field oscillation along the downward /upward diagonal of the unit cell 
and perturbed mediately by the propagating modes coupled both on the entering and leaving 
sides of the concave layer.  
 
17 
 
Predominant modes: The modes on the complementary convex and concave layers can be 
identified on the |Ez| and |Bz| maps, respectively. The forward illumination configuration is 
close to the C (U) orientation on the convex (concave) layer, and very similar modes are excited 
on the corresponding layers of Pattern-I (forward_I=95.39°) and Pattern-II (forward_II=95.23°). 
Namely, horizontal (vertical) dipoles develop on the convex (concave) nanoring and horizontal 
dipoles (quadrupoles) are observable on the convex (concave) nanocrescents (Fig. 7c and Fig. 
8c).  
Figure 8. Near-field phenomena of Pattern-II. (a, d) Charge distribution on consecutive layer surfaces (Video 5, 6), (b, e) 
magnetic field (yellow), displacement current (blue) and vorticity distribution on entering and leaving concave surfaces (Video 
7, 8), (c, f) |Ez| on convex and |Bz| on concave entering and leaving surfaces, (g, h, i, j) |Bz| on vertical cross-sections through 
A-B sub-lattices, with schematics on the left side; a, b, c, g, h/d, e, f, i, j) forward /backward propagation direction. Emulated 
magnetic field related pm dynamics on Pattern-II. (k) pxy, (l) pz, (m) inclination, (n) amplitude (please note the existence of 
offset). Inset on (m) segment: multi-unitcell schematic figure in the xy-plane, indicating the A and B sub-lattices. 
In contrast, in backward propagation direction the |Ez| and |Bz| distribution on the nanoring 
significantly differ, since the dipoles are oriented along backward_I=120.1° and ~30° on the 
convex and concave nanoring in case of Pattern-I, while the |Ez| and |Bz| lobes appear along 
backward=65.62° and ~155° in Pattern-II (Fig. 7f and Fig. 8f). (Slightly different orientation is 
noticeable on the entering concave surfaces, where the dipoles are oriented at ~45° /135° in 
case of Pattern-I/II). As a result, the convex and concave mode distributions are perpendicular 
almost perfectly.  
 
18 
 
This is in accordance with the EM duality in case of orthogonal entering polarizations. The 
nanocrescents exhibit mixed higher order modes, which are coupled with the propagating SPPs 
on the concave layers.  
Inspection of the |Ez| and |Bz| on the vertical cross-section of the multilayers indicates that there 
is no difference in layer’s dominance in forward direction (Fig. 7g,h and Fig. 8g,h), while in 
backward direction the entering convex layer /middle concave layer is relatively more 
dominant on both of the A and B sub-lattices of Pattern-I/II (Fig. 7i,j and Fig. 8i,j). This 
correlates with the larger transmission through Pattern-II. 
Field enhancements: The near-field enhancement (NFE), as well as the volume (V) 
corresponding to a decrease by a factor of 1/e and their product (NFE×V) was also determined 
and compared, both for the electric and magnetic field, and the NFE achieved in Pattern-I and 
Pattern-II was also compared  (see Supporting Information, Table S1 and Table S2) 
3.8 Emulated magnetic field, related vorticity and helicity 
In order to recognize displacement current (D) loops and related pm magnetic dipoles, the D 
and H field distributions were inspected on the surfaces of the concave layer. The Hz 
component (parallel with the propagation) was negligible in both patterns, therefore the Hxy 
components were inspected in more detail (Fig. 7b,e and Fig. 8b,e). 
The fingerprint of D loops is recognizable also on the xy plane cross-section, pronouncedly 
around the nanorings and noticeably around the nanocrescents as well (Fig.. 7b,e and Fig. 8b,e, 
blue). The Hxy component shows a magnetic dipole along 5° at the nanoring in case of 
forward propagation direction on both multilayers, while the magnetic dipoles are oriented at 
= 30° and = 155° on the concave layer of Pattern-I and Pattern-II, respectively (Fig. 7b, e and 
Fig. 8b, e, yellow). The orientation of the polarization ellipses determined based on the Stokes 
parameters (Fig. 1f and Fig. 2f), the D-field and the accompanying Hxy components are in 
accordance with the small and large rotation in the forward and backward propagation 
direction, considering either linearly or elliptically polarized light illumination in the backward 
propagation direction. The consecutive polarization orientations for the forward and backward 
incoming and outgoing beams are forward_I = -5.39°; backward_I := forward_I=-30.06°; backward_I= 
-94.47° for the Pattern-I, while forward_II = -5.23°; backward_II := forward_II=24.38°; backward_II= 
88.43° were registered in case of Pattern-II (Fig. 1f and Fig. 2f). These components also prove 
the most important difference, which is that the polarization rotation occurs in different 
directions in the two patterns (Fig. 7b, e, Video 3, 4 –to– Fig. 8b, e, Video 7, 8). The vorticity 
(Re(E×H*)) and helicity (Re(E∙H*)) were also inspected on these surfaces (Fig. 7b,e and Fig. 
8b,e; see Supporting Information Fig. S13 and Fig. S14, all in purple). The distribution of these 
quantities is more structured in case of Pattern-II. 
3.9 Induced magnetic dipole 
The amplitude and pxy components as well as the inclinations of the pm corresponding to the A 
and B sub-lattices in forward /backward propagation direction in Pattern-I are very similar to 
those in backward /forward propagation direction in Pattern-II. Only exception is the 
inclination of the pm in A sub-lattice, which phase evolution differs in backward propagation 
direction in Pattern-I and in forward propagation direction in Pattern-II.  
 
19 
 
The pz component of the pm corresponding to the A and B sub-lattices in forward propagation 
direction in Pattern-I is also very similar to that in backward propagation direction in Pattern-
II, while the pz component in backward propagation direction in Pattern-I is almost two-times 
larger compared to that in forward propagation direction in Pattern-II, and the A sub-lattices 
show 90° phase difference (Fig. 7k-m, Fig. 8k-m). The shift between the phase evolution in A 
and B sub-lattices in backward propagation direction indicates the impact of co-existent space-
time modulation (Fig. 7k and Fig. 8k).  
3.10 Correlations between optical responses and the pm magnetic dipole offset, in- and 
out-of-plane as well as orthogonal components in sub-lattices 
The average of the pm shows an offset, which increases in (sub-lattice – forward /backward 
propagation direction nomination) A-f<B-b<B-f<A-b succession in Pattern-I, and B-f<A-b<B-
b<A-f succession in Pattern-II. (Fig. 7n, Fig. 8n). In case of Pattern-I the simultaneously larger 
asymmetric transmission and rotation in backward propagation direction correlate with the 
larger average and maximal pz and co-polarized components, as well as with the larger average 
inclination and cross-polarized component, in both sub-lattices.  
The offset, maximal and average amplitude and pxy projection, and maximal cross-polarized 
component correlate /anticorrelate for the A/B sub-lattice with AT and ∑, while the maximal 
inclination shows anti-correlation for both of the A and B sub-lattices (Fig. 7k-n, see 
Supporting Information Fig. S9d,e). 
In comparison, the asymmetric transmission /nonreciprocal rotation is larger in forward 
/backward propagation direction in Pattern-II, which correlates with the offset, co-polarized 
component in A sub-lattice /B sub-lattice, while the values for the amplitudes, in- and out-of-
plane and cross-polarized components of pm that are larger in backward propagation both in A 
and B sub-lattices, correlate with the polarization rotation (except the average cross-polarized 
in the B sub-lattice) (Fig. 8k-n, see Supporting Information Fig. S10d, e).  
These results indicate that the synthetic gauge resulting in AT and nonreciprocal polarization 
rotation is more closely related to the A sub-lattice in Pattern-I, while the larger AT in forward 
direction /nonreciprocal polarization rotation in backward direction is promoted by pm the A/B 
sub-lattice in Pattern-II. The relatively enhanced role of the B lattice in Pattern-II is confirmed 
also by the more structured vorticity and helicity characteristics (see Supporting Information 
Fig. S13 – to – Fig. S14, c segments especially). 
For both inspected multilayers the average inclination as well as the average and maximal pz 
component correlate with the polarization rotation, when the A and B sub-lattices are 
considered separately. This also indicates that the origin of the nonreciprocity is a vector gauge, 
which is revealed by a tilted-precessing magnetic dipole (Fig. 7n and Fig. 8n, Table S3). Even 
though the multilayer thickness is just slightly different for the Pattern-I and Pattern-II, the 
effective material parameters and the induced gauge are also different. Considering that the 
nonreciprocal polarization rotation, accompanying the GFR phenomenon, requires a vector 
gauge and a DC B-field component along the dominant modes’ propagation direction, however 
the results reveal that the subject of rotation is partially photonic and plasmonic mode.  
The correlations with the average and maximal amplitude and in-plane component for the A 
sub-lattice in Pattern-I, and for both sub-lattices in Pattern-II reveal that the plasmonic modes 
have an important role.  
 
20 
 
The different pm characteristic shows enhanced role of the plasmons in A sub-lattice in Pattern-
I, and balanced role of photonic and plasmonic modes in A and B sub-lattices in Pattern-II [72]. 
3.11 Correlation between displacement and optical response asymmetry on the 
multilayers  
Considering that nonreciprocal phenomena are accompanied by modification of the line of 
forces, and our former studies on similar patterns have shown correlation between optical 
responses and normal component displacement asymmetry, correlation study was realized 
[42,61,62].  
Pattern-I and Patter-II were inspected for one and two-sided linearly polarized illumination, 
and beside the nonreciprocal rotation the ATco and outflow asymmetry were compared in the 
former and latter case with the asymmetry of the normal component of the displacement vector. 
In case of Pattern-I the Dz_convex&concave on both of the convex and concave layers exhibits 
correlation with the asymmetry of the reversal |outflow|; while Dz_concave correlates with 
asymmetry of the ATcoclassical in the forward configuration for the concave layer, but only when 
the maximum values are compared. In case of Pattern-II theDz on the convex /concave layer 
exhibits correlation with the rotation and asymmetry of the cross-polarized classical AT and 
reversal of |outflow| / asymmetry of the co-polarized classical AT in backward / forward 
configuration. (Table S4). 
3.12 Time-domain studies 
The multilayer was illuminated by 12 fs laser pulses of central frequency corresponding to the 
GFR condition of Pattern-I and Pattern-II calculated with steady-state studies. The structure 
was illuminated with pulses incident perpendicularly and thereafter at a 45° polar angle to 
inspect time modulation (Fig. 9a-f and Fig. 10a-f with respective insets). All transmitted pulses’ 
complete envelope is longer than the 12 fs pulse according to the resonant behaviour, though 
the constituent pulses are shorter than the incoming one in case of splitting. The co-polarized 
component is significantly stronger at the transmission sides for both propagation directions in 
all bases, to varying degrees in the two different multilayers. 
In forward configuration, both the co-polarized and cross-polarized transmitted pulses split into 
two consecutive pulses. The individual pulses envelope’s amplitude decreases – except the 
cross-polarized component in Pattern-II, in which the second pulse is unambiguously enhanced 
(Fig. 9a and Fig. 10a). At a 45° incidence angle, no splitting is observed in the cross-polarized 
component (insets of Fig. 9a and Fig. 10a). In backward configuration in the backward bases, 
the co-polarized component is split into two consecutive transmitted pulses, and their 
envelope’s amplitude decreases, while the cross-polarized pulse is significantly prolonged and 
exhibits a delayed maximum at the gap of the co-polarized pulses independent from the angle 
of incidence (Fig. 9c and Fig. 10c and insets). In backward configuration in the forward bases 
both the co-polarized and cross-polarized components are split into two consecutive 
transmitted pulses, their envelope’s amplitude decreases, and the components are more 
commensurate in Pattern-II (Fig. 9b and Fig. 10b).  
When illuminated with a pulse incident at a 45°, the second peak in the cross-polarized 
components will be larger than the first, for both Patterns (Fig. 9b and Fig. 10b inset). 
Compared to the response in backward bases, the cross-polarized component is more 
 
21 
 
modulated in forward base. In either bases, there is no remarkable difference between the time 
evolutions except that the gap is more well-defined in Pattern-II. In the case of 45° of 
illumination, the most significant difference is that the aforementioned increase in the cross-
polarized component in the forward base less well defined in Pattern-II. 
The Fourier transform of the time signals were also inspected to analyse the modification of 
the spectral distribution (Fig. 9d-f and Fig. 10d-f). The spectral amplitude of transmitted light 
is much smaller than the excitation. The spectrum of co-polarized light is split in all cases 
regardless of illumination direction, tilting angle or bases. The peaks are close to each other 
(~50 nm), which is the origin of the beating-like time modulation observed as multiple 
transmitted pulses.  
Figure 9. Time-dependent optical response of Pattern-I. Co-polarized and cross-polarized components of (a-c) transmitted 
pulses, (d-f) spectral distribution for perpendicular incidence and 45° tilting in insets; (g-i) spectral distribution and transmitted 
pulses in insets; in (a, d, g) forward, and (b, c, e, f, h, i) backward configuration; (c, f, i) in backward, (a, d, g and b, e, h) in 
forward bases; using (a-f) 12 fs and (g-i) 120 fs short pulse illumination. 
The center of splitting is nearby the GFR wavelength. In the case of 45° tilting a significant 
difference between forward and backward directed illumination emerges, which indicates that 
tilting enhances the asymmetry (Fig. 9d-f and Fig. 10d-f insets).  
Namely in the backward direction the gap shifts to shorter wavelengths. The only well-defined 
difference between Pattern-I and Pattern-II is that the second spectral peak in the former is 
slightly broader. The transmission of cross-polarized light in the forward direction is much 
smaller compared to the co-polarized component (in agreement with the smaller rotation 
calculated with frequency-domain simulations).  
 
22 
 
There is a split nearby the GFR wavelength, which results a beating. In backward propagation 
and backward base, the splitting vanishes, resulting in a nearly Gaussian, slightly prolonged 
response due to the absence of beating. In backward propagation and forward base the first 
peak is significantly less intense, which is the origin of the moderate gap in the time-domain 
signal in cross-polarized components and the unambiguously increasing constituting pulse 
amplitude at 45° tilting.  
Figure 10. Time-dependent optical response of Pattern-II. Co-polarized and cross-polarized components of (a-c) transmitted 
pulses, (d-f) spectral distribution for perpendicular incidence and 45° tilting in insets; (g-i) spectral distribution and transmitted 
pulses in insets; in (a, d, g) forward, and (b, c, e, f, h, i) backward configuration; (c, f, i) in backward, (a, d, g and b, e, h) in 
forward bases; using (a-f) 12 fs and (g-i) 120 fs short pulse illumination. 
The multilayer was illuminated by 120 fs pulses as well, since the narrow bandwidth allows 
for distinguishing signals stemming from time modulation and originating from the broad 
bandwidth (Fig. 9g-i and Fig. 10g-i). The time evolution of the electric field shows less 
modulated transmitted pulses compared to the case of 12 fs excitation. The co-polarized pulse 
in the forward direction has a near-Gaussian shape but prolongs. In contrast, the cross-polarized 
light is delayed in the multilayer but preserves its Gaussian shape. In the backward direction 
and in backward base pulse splitting is observed, as with 12 fs pulse. The envelope of the 
consecutive pulses decreases in amplitude. The cross-polarized component preserves the 
Gaussian shape with a delay of 10 fs.  
In the forward base the splitting in co-polarized component is less pronounced, while the cross-
polarized component preserves the Gaussian shape. There is no noticeable difference between 
the two patterns due to the very similar geometry. 
 
23 
 
The spectral distribution of the forward transmitted signal indicates single strongly /slightly 
blue-shifted co- /cross-polarized peak, and several side-bands revealing a weak but well -
defined time modulation corresponding to characteristic frequency =7.2×1013 rad/s 
(geometric resonance of ~25 nm). In comparison, the spectral distribution of the backward 
transmitted signal indicates split in co-polarized peak, explaining the significant prolongation 
and splitting of the time evolution.  
The cross-polarized signal appears at the center of this split, with no noticeable splitting, in 
accordance with the Gaussian envelope of the time evolution. The difference between 
backward and forward bases is that the ratio of the side-peaks is interchanged. The peaks in 
backward base are more commensurable in amplitude, resulting in a more pronounced 
modulation in the time-domain signal. The spectral splits indicate that photonic transitions 
occur on different frequency scales. When time-periodic Floquet modulation is imparted, beat-
notes can be registered at harmonics of modulation frequencies in accordance with the literature 
[38]. 
3.14 Active layer compensation 
To compensate the losses in the multilayer and at the same time to preserve both the 
nonreciprocal rotation and the good transmission contrast, dielectric cover layers seeded with 
dye molecules were added, while asymmetry was allowed for their thickness – and the 
optimization of the layer thickness, dye concentration (N) and pump E-field strength (Epump) 
was performed, inheriting the azimuthal orientation of Pattern-II in forward direction. The 
active multilayers were inspected both in wavelength independent configurations, which is 
similar to the previous interpretations, and in wavelength dependent configurations (Fig. 11a-
c and d-f, Table S5). An active multilayer with side-layer thicknesses scaled to 0.63× and 0.71× 
of the decay length (242 nm), N=3.07×1026 m-3 and Epump=2.33×106 V/m ensured that the GFR 
condition is still met, namely the ∑ = -84.57° cumulative rotation was achieved; with enhanced 
balanced (1.35) and differential co-polarized asymmetric transmission (3.13), that was enabled 
by the strongly enhanced total backward transmission (3.24) as well as its enhanced projection 
onto the cross-polarized component of the forward direction (3.18), while the forward 
transmission (7.4×10-2) as well as its co-polarized components (4.7×10-2) remained small. 
These together ensure 67.47 transmission contrast in the forward bases (Fig. 11a-c). The sign 
of the rotations in both propagation directions is switched compared to the passive Pattern-II 
composition, while the relation between the forward and backward rotations remains the same, 
namely larger rotation occurs in backward propagation direction. The inspected GFR-FOM 
(0.21) and GFI-FOM (5.97×10-3) are also significantly enhanced. Although the resonant modes 
at the GFR are quasi-BICs, moderate Q-factor (116/281 in wavelength independent / 
configuration) corresponds to the narrow transmission peaks for backward propagation 
direction is due to the relatively broad emission spectra of the used dye. 
Thereafter a Kekulé transformation type dimerization was also applied, namely the radius of 
the upper convex quadrumer was decreased to 57.74 nm on the top layer and was rotated by -
30° (Pattern-II-dimerized), and the dye molecule concentration, Epump and the side-layer 
thicknesses remained the same.  
 
24 
 
Figure 11. Active isolators based on Pattern-II, transmission side. (a, d, g) Co-polarized transmission and rotation in forward 
and backward propagation direction, as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward cross-polarized 
component, (b, e, h) cumulative rotation, the balanced and differential co-polarized asymmetric transmission (triangular 
symbols indicate regions, where the backward transmission is larger), (c, f, i) ellipticity of outgoing beams, GFR-FOM, GFI-
FOM|backward| and GFI-FOM-activecross. (a-c) Wavelength independent, (d-f) wavelength dependent active Pattern-II and (g-i) 
wavelength dependent active dimerized Pattern-II configuration. 
This cover layer enabled that the GFR condition is better met, namely the ∑ = 89.65° 
cumulative rotation was achieved; with more enhanced balanced (1.42) and less enhanced 
differential asymmetric co-polarized transmission (2.73), that was enabled by moderately 
enhanced total backward transmission (2.99) as well as its commensurate enhanced projection 
onto the cross-polarized component of the forward direction (2.85), while the forward 
transmission (1.3×10-1) as well as its co-polarized component (1.2×10-1) slightly increased, but 
remained an order of magnitude smaller compared to the backward transmission. These 
together ensure 23.44 transmission contrast in the forward bases (Fig. 11g-i). The sign of the 
rotations in both propagation direction remains the same compared to the passive Pattern-II 
compositions, while the relation between the forward and backward rotations becomes 
balanced, it is almost 45° in both propagation directions. The inspected GFR-FOM (1.05), GFI-
FOM (1.3×10-2) are an order of magnitude enhanced compared to the active Pattern-II 
configuration. The Q-factor (1.5×104 in  configuration) of the narrow transmission peaks 
for backward propagation direction is significantly enhanced.The cross-polarized components 
and the determined FOMs for wavelength independent (Fig. S15a-c) and dependent (Fig. S15d-
f) backward illumination for active Pattern-II configuration and for wavelength dependent 
active dimerized configuration (Fig. S15 g-i) are presented in the Supporting Information. 
 
25 
 
These sub-wavelength active multilayers are proposed as an extremely thin GFR elements, 
moreover can serve as nonreciprocal isolators.  
4. Conclusions 
An efficient optimization methodology was developed to achieve generalized Faraday rotation, 
which involves both nonreciprocal rotations and considerable asymmetrical transmission. The 
subject of optimization was a multilayer of Babinet complementary periodic structures 
constructed with miniarrays of spherical nanoresonators, while the tool was an optimization 
algorithm that allows for setting criteria, and definition of complex objective functions 
constructed with all metamaterial configuration parameters that can be monitored 
simultaneously. The key idea is to allow arbitrary azimuthal orientations, that differ for the two 
propagation directions, thereby facilitating the determination of those orthogonal directions in 
bianisotropic multilayers, which ensure the spectral overlap of the nonreciprocal polarization 
rotation and asymmetric transmission phenomena.  
The topological effects involved in the Brillouin zone folding and mode coupling phenomena 
are (i) the coupling of the nanodisk/nanohole, nanoring and nanocrescents in convex/concave 
miniarrays resulting in symmetry breaking perturbation and quasi-BICs (ii) co-existent two 
sub-lattices – A with, while B without nanoring – providing period-doubling perturbation, in-
plane twisting and supporting charge rotation with phase difference, (iii) the unique 
arrangement of the satellite nanocrescents, which ensures that each spin-distinguishing sub-
lattices are centrally symmetric but possess distinctly different deformations facilitating 
hierarchical time-periodic Floquet modulation and (iv) coupling of localized and propagating 
modes and strong-coupling in the near-field between Babinet complementary consecutive 
layers that are arranged in convex-concave-convex sequence, (v) bianisotropy stemmed from 
the unique pseudo non-Hermitian composition supporting unconventional dispersion 
characteristic and space-time modulation. Even though the spacers between basic constituent 
layers are symmetric, the polarized light illumination results in distinctly different, propagation 
direction and tilting-side dependent, optical responses. Moreover, the hierarchical parameter-
sensitivity of the coupling phenomena on miniarrays, sub-lattices and constituent layers 
manifests itself in two optimized multilayers possessing very similar geometries, meaning few 
tenth of nanometers thickness difference, yet these metamaterials exhibit fundamentally 
different nanophotonic phenomena, including the time-periodic modulation characteristic and 
the related synthetic gauge.  
Nonreciprocal rotation and the asymmetry of co-polarized transmission are demonstrated in 
the optimized GFR configuration, novelty of which is that it involves two different azimuthal 
orientations that deviates from conventional reciprocal-lattice directions. Moreover, the 
mapping of the dispersion in these azimuthal orientations proves that the asymmetry in 
transmission considered in classical sense manifests itself in quantized flat bands, which are 
intersected by the grating-coupling related branches governed by bianisotropic effective 
parameters in the specific configuration. These features are propagation-direction as well as 
tilting-side dependent, revealing a completely novel metamaterial. The trade-off between 
asymmetrical co-polarized transmission and nonreciprocal rotation is caused by that these 
optical responses are related to the quasi-BICs of the localized modes on constituent 
nanoresonators and scattered photonic and propagating plasmonic modes corresponding to 
different bands folded into the first Brillouin zone.  
 
26 
 
The multilayer is plasmonic, accordingly can be considered as pseudo non-Hermitian, and the 
GFR appears on the band originating from folding and flattening, which sensitively depend on 
parameters. 
The near-field phenomena, including displacement current loops and vortical magnetic fields, 
prove the existence of a synthetic gauge and an emulated magnetic field, which manifests itself 
in tilted-precessing magnetic dipoles, yet producing an offset, proving a potential to act as a 
horizontal and vertical torque, which facilitates nonreciprocal polarization rotation. The 
nonreciprocity proves the existence of synthetic vector-gauge, while the time-periodic Floquet 
modulations adds a synthetic parameter along the frequency.  
The time-evolution of the charge distribution on the sub-lattices shows reversal rotation on the 
nanoring and nanocrescents, thereby proving that the miniarrays act as a unique Haldane 
model. Moreover, reversal rotation occurs on the coupled loops of A and B sub-lattices. The 
spectral distribution and the temporal response is modulated due to the beating related to 
overlapping resonances of the nanoring – nanocrescent, A and B sub-lattices and different zone 
folded SPPs. In addition, remarkable configuration and propagation direction dependent 
vorticity features are identifiable. The coupling of localized and propagating modes causes 
sudden circulating charge-distribution flips in each optical cycle, ensuring that the response of 
the pseudo non-Hermitian metamaterial is modulated both in space and time. The time-periodic 
Floquet modulation reveals co-existence of scalar and vector gauge, accordingly E and B-field 
are also at play, which indicates capability to achieve quantized Landau levels and Landau 
Zener Tunneling.  
The multilayer composition manifests itself in a unique bianisotropic medium, where all –
Tellegen, artificial moving, omega and chirality– parameters are modulated. Accordingly, the 
temporal responses show polarization specific pulse reshaping via beating, proving that the 
orthogonally-polarized components can be transiently enhanced, and complete polarization 
specific pulse-splitting can occur, offering the possibility of temporal cloaking. Both 
polarization components indicate asymmetric coupling, which indicates non-Abelian synthetic 
gauge characteristic.  
The trade-off between the cumulative rotation, which approaches 90° within a spectral interval 
where the asymmetrical transmission is limited by the pseudo non-Hermiticity of the multilayer 
metamaterial, and the bianisotropy, which causes that the metamaterial supports elliptical 
eigenmodes, justifies that optimization is necessary. Despite these limitations, it is possible to 
re-enhance the transmission, while preserving the cumulative rotation by adding an active 
cover layer. Moreover, the GFR criterion can be satisfied more accurately, and the reminiscent 
ellipticity can be reduced, when topological tools, e.g. judicious dimerization is involved into 
the design. 
In summary, our optimization method resulted in a completely novel bianisotropic multilayer 
metamaterial, which shows several topological properties that ensure unique dispersion and 
time-periodic Floquet modulation characteristic and high-level bianisotropy enabling 
Generalized Faraday Rotation via sub-wavelength thickness all-optical elements. Further 
applications include design of metamaterial platform supporting photonic Landau levels, and 
QIP elements relaying on band braiding phenomena due to the enormously high degrees of 
freedom achievable in synthetic parameter space. 
 
27 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the National Research, Development and Innovation Office 
(NKFIH) of Hungary, projects: "Nanoplasmonic Laser Inertial Fusion Research Laboratory" 
(NKFIH-2022-2.1.1-NL-2022-00002) 
and 
"National 
Laboratory 
for 
Cooperative 
Technologies" (NKFIH-2022-2.1.1-NL-2022-00012) in the framework of the Hungarian 
National Laboratory program, as well as the Hu-rizont “Metamaterials for Optimized Quantum 
Information Processing” (METAOPTQIP, 2025-1.2.1-HU-RIZONT-2025-00107). 
References 
1. X. Ni, S. Yves, A. Krasnok, and A. Alù, “Topological metamaterials,” Chemical Reviews, 
no. 123 (2023): 7585–7654. 
2. D. D. Smith, H. Chang, K. A. Fuller, A. T. Rosenberger, and R. W. Boyd, “Coupled-
resonator-induced transparency,” Physical Review A, no. 69 (2004): 063804. 
3. A. E. Miroshnichenko, S. Flach, and Y. S. Kivshar, “Fano resonances in nanoscale 
structures,” Reviews of Modern Physics, no. 82 (2010): 2257–2298. 
4. Q. Xu, S. Sandhu, M. L. Povinelli, J. Shakya, S. Fan, and M. Lipson, “Experimental 
Realization of an On-Chip All-Optical Analogue to Electromagnetically Induced 
Transparency,” Physical Review Letters, no. 96 (2006): 123901. 
5. F. Hao, P. Nordlander, M. T. Burnett, and S. A. Maier, “Enhanced tunability and linewidth 
sharpening of plasmon resonances in hybridized metallic ring/disk nanocavities,” Physical 
Review B, no. 76 (2007): 245417. 
6. F. Hao, Y. Sonnefraud, P. V. Dorpe, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, and P. Nordlander, Nano 
Letters, no. 8 (2008): 3983–3988. 
7. F. Hao, P. Nordlander, Y. Sonnefraud, P. V. Dorpe, and S. A. Maier, “Tunability of 
Subradiant Dipolar and Fano-Type Plasmon Resonances in Metallic Ring/Disk Cavities: 
Implications for Nanoscale Optical Sensing,” ACS Nano, no. 3 (2009): 643–652. 
8. R. Li, M. R. Bourgeois, C. Cherqui, et.al., “Hierarchical Hybridization in Plasmonic 
Honeycomb Lattices,” Nano Letters, no. 19 (2019): 6435–6441.  
9. V. S. Asadchy, A. Díaz‐Rubio, and S. A. Tretyakov, “Bianisotropic metasurfaces: physics 
and applications,” Nanophotonics, no. 7 (2018): 1069–1094. 
10. Z. Wang, Y. D. Chong, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljačić, “Reflection-free one-way edge 
modes in a gyromagnetic photonic crystal,” Physical Review Letters, no. 100 (2008): 013905. 
11. E. Plum, V. A. Fedotov, A. S. Schwanecke, N. I. Zheludev, and Y. Chen, “Giant optical 
gyrotropy due to electromagnetic coupling,” Applied Physics Letters, no. 90 (2007): 223113. 
12. S. Safaei Jazi, I. Faniayeu, R. Cichelero, et. al., “Optical Tellegen metamaterial with 
spontaneous magnetization,” Nature Communications, no. 15 (2024): 1293. 
13. V. A. Chistyakov, V. S. Asadchy, S. Fan, A. Alù, and A. Krasnok, “Tunable magnetless 
optical isolation with twisted Weyl semimetals,” Nanophotonics, no. 12 (2023): 3333–3340. 
14. M. H. Mostafa, M. S. Mirmoosa, M. S. Sidorenko, V. S. Asadchy, and S. A. Tretyakov, 
Temporal interfaces in complex electromagnetic materials: an overview,” Optical Materials 
Express, no. 14 (2024): 1103–1127. 
15. J. Cui, H. Yan, Y. Lou, X. Huang, and Q. Zhu, “Metamaterials with asymmetric 
transmission effect based on magnetic field manipulation,” Scientific Reports, no. 15 (2025): 
12183. 
16. C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, A. D. Stone, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljačić, “Bound states in 
the continuum,” Nature Reviews Materials, no. 1 (2016): 16048. 
 
28 
 
17. A. Canós Valero, H. K. Shamkhi, A. S. Kupriianov, et.al., Superscattering emerging from 
the physics of bound states in the continuum,” Nature Communications, no. 14 (2023): 4689. 
18. S. Cai, Z. Wu, X. Liu, et. al., “Nonreciprocal polarized transmission via bound states in the 
continuum,” Optics Letters, no. 49 (2024): 5099–5102. 
19. L. M. Máñez‐Espina, I. Faniayeu, V. Asadchy, and A. Díaz‐Rubio, “Extreme 
Nonreciprocity in Metasurfaces Based on Bound States in the Continuum,” Advanced Optical 
Materials, no. 12 (2024): 2301455. 
20. K. Sun, W. Wang, and Z. Han, “High-Q resonances in periodic photonic structures,” 
Physical Review B, no. 109 (2024): 085426. 
21. G. Weick, C. Woollacott, W. L. Barnes, O. Hess, and E. Mariani, “Dirac-like Plasmons in 
Honeycomb Lattices of Metallic Nanoparticles,” Physical Review Letters, no. 110 (2013): 
106801. 
22. K. Fang, Z. Yu, and S. Fan, “Realizing effective magnetic field for photons by controlling 
the phase of dynamic modulation,” Nature Photonics, no. 6 (2012): 782–787. 
23. A. B. Khanikaev, S. Hossein Mousavi, W.-K. Tse, M. Kargarian, A. H. MacDonald, and 
G. Shvets, “Photonic topological insulators,” Nature Materials, no. 12 (2013): 233–239. 
24. A. P. Slobozhanyuk, A. B. Khanikaev, D. S. Filonov, D. A. Smirnova, A. E. 
Miroshnichenko, and Y. S. Kivshar, “Experimental demonstration of topological effects in 
bianisotropic metamaterials,” Scientific Reports, no. 6 (2016): 22270. 
25. L.-H. Wu, and X. Hu, “Scheme for Achieving a Topological Photonic Crystal by Using 
Dielectric Material,” Physical Review Letters, no. 114, (2015): 223901. 
26. A. P. Slobozhanyuk, A. V. Shchelokova, X. Ni, et. al., “Near-field imaging of spin-locked 
edge states in all-dielectric topological metasurfaces,” Applied Physics Letters, no. 114 (2019): 
031103. 
27. M. A. Gorlach, X. Ni, D. Smirnova, et. al., “Far-field probing of leaky topological states in 
all dielectric metasurfaces,” Nature Communications, no. 9 (2018): 909. 
28. A. Vakulenko, S. Kiriushechkina, D. Smirnova, et. al., “Adiabatic topological photonic 
interfaces,” Nature Communications, no. 14 (2023): 4629. 
29. Y. Kawaguchi, D. Smirnova, F. Komissarenko, et. al., “Pseudo-spin switches and 
Aharonov-Bohm effect for topological boundary modes,” Science Advances, no. 10 (2024): 
6095. 
30. D. Smirnova, S. Kiriushechkina, A. Vakulenko, and A. B. Khanikaev, “Topological 
metasurfaces,” Optical Materials Express, no. 14 (2024): 2065–2082. 
31. Y. Kawaguchi, D. Smirnova, F. Komissarenko, et. al., “Freeform Spectrally Stable 
Topological Photonic Vortex Resonators,” arXiv, 2026, DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2603.21486. 
32. C. Caloz, A. Alù, S. Tretyakov, D. Sounas, K. Achouri, and Z.-L. Deck-Léger, 
“Electromagnetic Nonreciprocity,” Physical Review Applied, no. 10 (2018): 047001. 
33. W. Song, Y. Yang, Z. Lin, et. al., “Artificial gauge fields in photonics,” Nature Reviews 
Physics, no. 7 (2025): 606–620. 
34. Y. Hadad, D. L. Sounas, and A. Alú, “Space-time gradient metasurfaces,” Physical Review 
B, no. 92 (2015): 100304R. 
35. E. Galiffi, R. Tirole, S. Yin, et. al., “Photonics of time-varying media,” Advanced 
Photonics, no. 4 (2022): 014002. 
36. S. Yin, E. Galiffi, and A. Alù, “Floquet metamaterials,” eLight, no. 2 (2022): 8. 
37. P. Dong, S. F. Preble, J. T. Robinson, S. Manipatruni, and M. Lipson, “Inducing Photonic 
Transitions between Discrete Modes in a Silicon Optical Microcavity,” Physical Review 
Letters, no. 100 (2008): 033904. 
 
29 
 
38. A. Dutt, M. Minkov, Q. Lin, L. Yuan, D. A. B. Miller and S. Fan, “Experimental band 
structure spectroscopy along a synthetic dimension,” Nature Communications, no. 10 (2019): 
3122. 
39. J. Xu, W. Mai, and D. H. Werner, “Complete polarization conversion using anisotropic 
temporal slabs,” Optics Letters, no. 46 (2021): 1373–1376. 
40. S. Taravati, “Giant linear nonreciprocity, zero reflection, and zero band gap in equilibrated 
space-time-varying media,” Physical Review Applied, no. 9 (2018): 064012. 
41. P. A. Huidobro, E. Galiffi, S. Guenneau, R. V. Craster, and J. B. Pendry, “Fresnel drag in 
space–time-modulated, metamaterials,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, no. 
116 (2019): 24943–24948. 
42. J. B. Pendry, E. Galiffi, and P. A. Huidobro, “Gain mechanism in time-dependent media,” 
Optica, no. 8 (2021): 636–637. 
43. M. M. Asgari, P. Garg, X. Wang, M. S. Mirmoosa, C. Rockstuhl, and V. Asadchy, “Theory 
and applications of photonic time crystals: a tutorial,” Advances in Optics and Photonics, no. 
16 (2024): 958–1063. 
44. I. Koutzoglou, S. Amanatiadis, and N. V. Kantartzis, “Robust and Integrable Time-Varying 
Metamaterials: A Systematic Survey and Coherent Mapping,” Nanomaterials, no. 16 (2026): 
195. 
45. J. C. Serra, and M. G. Silveirinha, “Engineering Topological Phases with a Traveling-Wave 
Spacetime Modulation,” Laser & Photonics Review, no. 20 (2026): e00560. 
46. J. C. Serra, and M. G. Silveirinha, “Rotating spacetime modulation: Topological phases 
and spacetime Haldane model,” Physical Review B, no. 107 (2023): 035133. 
47. M. H. Mostafa, M. S. Mirmoosa, E. Galiffi, S. Yin, A. Alù, and S. A. Tretyakov, Broadband 
amplification of light through adiabatic spatiotemporal modulation,” arXiv, 2025, DOI: 
10.48550/ARXIV.2506.20358. 
48. X. Wang, P. Garg, M. S. Mirmoosa, A. G. Lamprianidis, C. Rockstuhl, and V. S. Asadchy, 
“Expanding momentum bandgaps in photonic time crystals through resonances,” Nature 
Photonics, no. 19 (2025): 149–155. 
49. G. Castaldi, M. Coppolaro, M. Moccia, C. Rizza, N. Engheta, and V. Galdi, “Analytic 
Inverse Design of Temporal Metamaterials via Space-Time Duality,” Physical Review Letters, 
no. 136 (2026): 206901. 
50. M.-W. Li, J.-W. Liu, X. Wang, W.-J. Chen, G. Ma, and J.-W. Dong, “Topological temporal 
boundary states in a non-Hermitian spatial crystal,” Physical Review Letters, no. 135 (2025): 
187101. 
51. K. Wang, A. Dutt, C. C. Wojcik, and S. Fan, “Topological complex-energy braiding of 
non-Hermitian bands,” Nature, no. 598 (2021): 59. 
52. C. Lu, O. You, Y. Zheng, et. al., “Realizing Landau levels with open equifrequency 
contours around band singularities”, Nature Communications, 2026, DOI:10.1038/s41467-
026-70879-1. 
53. D. Jalas, A. Petrov, M. Eich, et. al., “What is — and what is not — an optical isolator,” 
Nature Photonics, no. 7 (2013): 579–582. 
54. Y. Ra’di, V. S. Asadchy, and S. A. Tretyakov, “One-way transparent sheets,” Physical 
Review B, no. 89 (2014): 075109. 
55. N. Chamanara, S. Taravati, Z.-L. Deck-Léger, and C. Caloz, “Optical isolation based on 
space-time engineered asymmetric photonic band gaps,” Physical Review B, no. 96 (2017): 
155409. 
 
30 
 
56. D. L. Sounas, and A. Alù, “Fundamental bounds on the operation of Fano nonlinear 
isolators,” Physica Review B, no. 97 (2018): 115431. 
57. J. W. You, Z. Lan, Q. Ma, et. al., “Topological metasurface: from passive toward active 
and beyond,” Photonics Research, no. 11 (2023): B65–B102. 
58. L. Yang, G. Li, X. Gao, and L. Lu, “Topological-cavity surface-emitting laser,” Nature 
Photonics, no. 16 (2022): 279–283. 
59. J. Ma, T. Zhou, M. Tang, H. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Xi, M. Martin, T. Baron, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, 
S. Chen and X. Sun, “Room-temperature continuous-wave topological Dirac-vortex 
microcavity lasers on silicon,” Light: Science & Applications, no. 12 (2023): 255. 
60. K. Sun, K. Wang, W. Li, et. al., “Structured coherent thermal emission from non-Hermitian 
metasurfaces,” Nature Communications, no. 17 (2026): 2449. 
61. E. Tóth, B. Bánhelyi, O. Fekete, and M. Csete, “Metamaterial properties of Babinet 
complementary complex structures,” Scientific Reports, no. 13 (2023): 4701. 
62. E. Tóth, O. A. Fekete, B. Bánhelyi, M. Durach, Z. Szabó, and M. Csete, “Layered Babinet 
complementary patterns acting as asymmetric negative index metamaterial,” Scientific 
Reports, no. 14 (2024): 29568. 
63. B. Bánhelyi, T. Csendes, B. Lévai, L. Pál, and D. Zombori, The GLOBAL Optimization 
Algorithm: Newly Updated with Java Implementation and Parallelization, Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 2018. 
64. Á. Sipos, E. Tóth, O. A. Fekete, and M. Csete, “Spectral Engineering via Complex Patterns 
of Circular Nano-object Miniarrays: I. Convex Patterns Tunable by Integrated Lithography 
Realized by Circularly Polarized Light,” Plasmonics, no. 16 (2021): 661–676. 
65. E. Tóth, Á. Sipos, O. A. Fekete, and M. Csete, “Spectral Engineering Via Complex Patterns 
of Circular Nano-Object Miniarrays: II. Concave Patterns Tunable by Integrated Lithography 
Realized by Circularly Polarized Light,” Plasmonics, no. 16 (2021): 599–617. 
66. M. Csete, Á. Sipos, and A. Szalai, US Patent, US9291915B2, 2016. 
67. P. A. Huidobro, M. G. Silveirinha, E. Galiffi, and J. B. Pendry, “Homogenization Theory 
of Space-Time Metamaterials,” Physical Review Applied, no. 16 (2021): 014044. 
68. Zs. Szabó, “Closed Form Kramers–Kronig Relations With Shape Preserving Piecewise 
Cubic Interpolation,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, no. 69 (2021): 
2439–2446. 
69. D.-H. Kwon, D. H. Werner, A. V. Kildishev and V. M. Shalaev, “Material parameter 
retrieval procedure for general bi-isotropic metamaterials and its application to optical chiral 
negative-index metamaterial design,” Optics Express, no. 16 (2008): 11822. 
70. M. Durach, R. Williamson, J. Adams, et. al., “On Fresnel-Airy Equations, Fabry-Perot 
Resonances and Surface Electromagnetic Waves in Arbitrary Bianisotropic Metamaterials,” 
Progress in Electromagnetics Research, no. 173 (2022): 53–69. 
71. M. Durach, R. Williamson, M. Laballe, and T. Mulkey, “Tri- and Tetrahyperbolic 
Isofrequency Topologies Complete Classification of Bianisotropic Materials,” Applied 
Sciences, no. 10 (2020): 763. 
72. B. Assouline, and A. Capua, “Faraday effects emerging from the optical magnetic field,” 
Scientific Reports, no. 15 (2025): 39566. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Supporting Information 
Multilayer Babinet Metamaterial to Initiate Nonreciprocal Topological Phenomena and 
Generalized Faraday Rotation 
Balázs Bánhelyi1, Miklós Waldhauser2, Virág Szünstein2, Ákos Sebők-Pap2, Olivér Ardelán2, Anna Kőházi-Kis2, 
Dávid Vass2, András Szenes2, David Keene3, Maxim Durach3, Mária Csete2 
1Department of Computational Optimization, University of Szeged, Árpád tér 2, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary; 
2Department of Optics and Quantum Electronics, University of Szeged, Dóm tér 9, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary; 
3Department of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Physics, Georgia Southern University, 301 Veazy Hall, Suite 2000, Statesboro, GA 30458 
Correspondence: mcsete@physx.u-szeged.hu 
Inspected Figure of Merits to quantify Generalized Faraday Rotation (GFR) and 
Generalized Faraday Isolator (GFI) capabilities of the optimized multilayers. 
For the qualification of the proposed passive targets two primary FOMs were evaluated, 
namely the GFR-FOM (Eq. S1), which quantifies asymmetrical transmission and cumulative 
rotation properties of the multilayer, and the GFI-FOM (Eq. S2), where the isolator properties 
and the ellipticity were also inspected. 
𝐺𝐹𝑅−𝐹𝑂𝑀= ห𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗห∙
1
ห90° −|Σ|ห+ 1 
(S1) 
 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀=
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙
1
ቀ1 −𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቁ+ 1
∙ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ∙
1
ห90° −|Σ|ห+ 1 ∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S2) 
Two additional FOMs were also evaluated, namely the GFI-FOM (Eq. S3), which also 
quantifies the ellipticity of the outgoing beams in addition to the asymmetrical transmission 
and cumulative rotation properties, and the GFI-FOMAT- (Eq. S4), where similar weighting 
was used for the asymmetrical transmission, cumulative rotation and ellipticity. 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀ఛ= ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ∙
1
ห90° −|Σ|ห+ 1 ∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S3) 
 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀஺்ିఛିஊ
ିଵ= ൮
90 −ห90° −|Σ|ห+ 90 ∙ฬ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙ം೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ฬ+ 1
163 + 18 ∙ቀቚห𝜏௙ห−|𝜏௕|ቚ+ 1ቁ
൲
୪୬൫หఛ೑หା|ఛ್|ାଵ൯ାଵ
 
(S4) 
In case of the active targets the GFR-FOM was used as a primary FOM. However, the GFI-
FOM was slightly modified considering that when the transmission in backward direction 
exceeds unity, the FOM becomes negative, so for the second term of the GFI-FOM, absolute 
value was used (GFI-FOM|backward| (Eq. S5)).  
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀|௕௔௖௞௪௔௥ௗ| =
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙
1
ቚ1 −𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ+ 1
∙ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ∙
1
ห90° −|Σ|ห+ 1 ∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S5) 
The novel GFI-FOM-activecross was also introduced, where the achieved transmission values 
were normalized (Eq. S6). 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀−𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒௖௥௢௦௦=
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙
𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
∙
ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
∙
1
ቚ90° −หΣหቚ+ 1
∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S6) 
 
 
32 
 
Three further FOMs were evaluated, where different components of the transmission were 
included in order to quantify the GFR and GFI properties (Eq. S7-S9).  
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀−𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒௠௜௫௘ௗ=
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
∙
ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
∙
1
ቚ90° −หΣหቚ+ 1
∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S7) 
 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀−𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ=
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್+ 1
∙
ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
+ 1
∙
1
ฬ90° −ቚΣቚฬ+ 1
∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S8) 
 
𝐺𝐹𝐼−𝐹𝑂𝑀−𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒௜௡௩௘௥௦௘=
1
𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑+ 1
∙ቌ
1
−𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್∙ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್ቚ
+ 1ቍ∙
1
ቚ𝑇௙௨௟௟
௕_ఊ್−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ఊ೑
ቚ+ 1
∙
1
ฬ90° −ቚΣቚฬ+ 1
∙
1
|𝜏௙| + |𝜏௕| + 1 
(S9) 
 
Determining the polarization rotation and ellipticity of the outgoing plane waves. 
The polarization rotation and the ellipticity of the outgoing plane wave were determined via 
the Stokes-parameters [1], which can be determined by the electric-field on the transmission 
side (Eq. S10). 
𝑆଴= 𝐸௫ଶ+ 𝐸௬ଶ; 𝑆ଵ= 𝐸௫ଶ−𝐸௬ଶ; 𝑆ଶ= 2𝐸௫𝐸௬𝑐𝑜𝑠(ΔΦ), 𝑆ଷ= 2𝐸௫𝐸௬𝑠𝑖𝑛(ΔΦ), 
(S10) 
where Ex and Ey are the x- and y-component of the transmitted E-field, and =y-x is the 
phase difference between them. 
The orientation () and the ellipticity () of the outgoing plane wave can be given by (Eq. S11): 
𝛽= 1
2 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛൬𝑆ଶ
𝑆ଵ
൰; 𝜏= 1
2 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑠𝑖𝑛൬𝑆ଷ
𝑆଴
൰ 
(S11) 
From the incoming () and outgoing () orientation the polarization rotation can be calculated 
as rot=- 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
Pattern-I linear 
Pattern-II linear 
Pattern-I elliptical 
Pattern-II elliptical 
Tୡ୭
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ) 
2.6 
6.9 
2.6 
6.9 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ)
0.78 
3.0 
0.78 
3.0 
T୤୳୪୪
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ) 
3.38 
9.9 
3.38 
9.9 
Tୡ୭
୤_ஓୠ(× 10ିଷ)
2.3 
2.5 
4.6 
5.2 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
୤_ஓୠ(× 10ିଶ)
0.92 
1.1 
1.2 
1.2 
T୤୳୪୪
୤_ஓୠ(× 10ିଶ) 
1.15 
1.35 
1.66 
1.72 
Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓ୤(× 10ିସ) 
0.16 
1.2 
0.16 
1.2 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୠ_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ) 
6.9 
1.8 
6.9 
1.8 
T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓ୤(× 10ିସ) 
0.85 
1.38 
0.85 
1.38 
Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓୠ(× 10ିଷ) 
2.2 
2.5 
3.4 
4.6 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୠ_ஓୠ(× 10ିଶ) 
0.93 
1 
1.2 
1.3 
T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓୠ(× 10ିଶ) 
1.15 
1.25 
1.54 
1.76 
T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୭
ஓୠ→ஓ୤(× 10ିସ) 
1.3 
0.61 
3 
9.3 
T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ஓୠ→ஓ୤
(× 10ିଶ) 
1.2 
1.3 
1.5 
1.6 
ATୡ୭
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ) 
0.948 
5.47 
0.948 
5.47 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪_ஓ୤(× 10ିହ) 
6.11 
1.22 
6.11 
1.22 
ATୡ୭
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪_ஓୠ(× 10ିସ) 
0.181 
0.249 
12.2 
6.41 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪_ஓୠ(× 10ିସ) 
1.16 
5.29 
4.37 
4.02 
ATୡ୭
ୠୟ୪ୟ୬ୡୣୢ(× 10ିଷ) 
2.20 
2.40 
3.32 
4.49 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୠୟ୪ୟ୬ୡୣୢ(× 10ିଶ) 
0.929 
1.04 
1.19 
1.28 
ATୡ୭
ୢ୧୤୤ୣ୰ୣ୬୲୧ୟ୪(× 10ିଶ) 
1.14 
1.28 
1.49 
1.64 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୢ୧୤୤ୣ୰ୣ୬୲୧ୟ୪(× 10ିସ) 
1.18 
2.95 
0.308 
9.04 
AT୤୳୪୪
ୢ୧୤୤ୣ୰ୣ୬୲୧ୟ୪(× 10ିଶ) 
1.14 
1.27 
1.49 
1.63 
rotf (°) 
-24.67 
29.60 
-24.67 
29.60 
rotb (°) 
-64.41 
64.05 
-63.95 
65.43 
 (°) 
-89.08 
93.66 
-88.63 
95.04 
f (°) 
17.52 
20.09 
17.52 
20.09 
b (°) 
5.92 
-1.48 
2.99 
-1.07 
GFR-FOM (×10-3) 
1.15 
0.516 
1.40 
74.4 
GFI-FOM (×10-4) 
1.22 
0.609 
1.47 
0.616 
GFI-FOM(×10-4) 
2.43 
1.21 
2.92 
1.22 
GFI-FOMAT---1 
0.446 
1.420 
0.624 
1.530 
Q-factor (Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓୠ) 
320.87 
317.29 
319.86 
317.82 
Q-factor (T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓୠ) 
319.76 
318.24 
319.68 
317.85 
Q-factor (T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ஓୠ→ஓ୤
) 
319.61 
317.44 
319.61 
317.20 
Table S1. Passive multilayer optical response parameters: transmission, polarization rotation and FOMs at extrema. The co-
polarized (Tco), cross-polarized (Tcross) and total (Tfull) transmissions, where the superscript indicates forward (f) and backward 
(b) propagation direction for azimuthal orientation corresponding to forward (f) and backward (b) configurations. The 
transmission in backward propagation direction projected onto the co-polarized (𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௢
ఊ௕→ఊ௙) and cross-polarized (𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ௕→ఊ௙
) 
component of forward direction. The classical co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ௙/ఊ௕= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ௙/ఊ௕−𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ௙/ఊ௕) and cross-polarized 
(𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟_ఊ௙/ఊ௕= 𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௙_ఊ௙/ఊ௕−𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕_ఊ௙/ఊ௕), the balanced co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ್) and cross-polarized 
(𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ= 𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕_ఊ್), the differential co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
) and cross-polarized 
(𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௢
ఊ್→ ఊ೑), and total (𝐴𝑇௙௨௟௟
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
) asymmetrical transmissions. The 
polarization rotations and ellipticity in forward (rotf and f) and backward (rotb and b) propagation directions, the cumulative 
rotation (). The FOMs qualifying the Generalized Faraday Rotation (GFR) and Generalized Faraday Isolator (GFI) properties 
of the passive multilayers and the Q-factor of the backward transmission peak in case of wavelength-dependent calculations 
for the quantities inside the brackets. 
 
 
34 
 
 
Figure S1. Optical responses of Pattern-I, transmission side. (a, d, m, p) Cross-polarized and (g, j) co-polarized transmission 
in forward and backward propagation direction, as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward (a, d, m, p) 
co-polarized and (g, j) cross-polarized component, (b, e, n ,q) the classical, balanced and differential cross-polarized and (h, 
k) co-polarized asymmetric transmission (triangular symbols indicate regions, where the backward transmission is larger), (c, 
f, o, r) GFI-FOM and GFI-FOMAT--∑-1 and (i, l) GFR-FOM and GFI-FOM as well as the ellipticity of outgoing beams. (a-c, 
g-i, m-o) Linearly, (d-f, j-l, p-r) elliptically polarized light for backward illumination, (a-f) wavelength independent and (g-r) 
wavelength dependent configuration. 
 
35 
 
 
Figure S2. Optical responses of Pattern-II, transmission side. (a, d, m, p) Cross-polarized and (g, j) co-polarized transmission 
in forward and backward and propagation direction, as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward (a, d, m, 
p) co-polarized and (g, j) cross-polarized component, (b, e, n, q) the classical, balanced and differential cross-polarized and (h, 
k) co-polarized asymmetric transmission (triangular symbols indicate regions, where backward transmission is larger), (c, f, 
o, r) GFI-FOM and GFI-FOMAT--∑-1 and (i, l) GFR-FOM and GFI-FOM as well as the ellipticity of outgoing beams. (a-c, g-
i, m-o) Linearly, (d-f, j-l, p-r) elliptically polarized light for backward illumination, (a-f) wavelength independent and (g-r) 
wavelength dependent configuration. 
 
 
36 
 
Figure S3. Dispersion characteristic of transmission polarization components and cross-polarized asymmetric transmission of 
Pattern-I. (a, d) Co-polarized transmission, (b, e) Cross-polarized transmission, (c, f) Classical cross-polarized asymmetric 
transmission; (a-c) forward, (d-f) backward propagation direction. 
Figure S4. Dispersion characteristic of transmission polarization components and cross-polarized asymmetric transmission of 
Pattern-II. (a, d) Co-polarized transmission, (b, e) Cross-polarized transmission, (c, f) Classical cross-polarized asymmetric 
transmission; (a-c) forward, (d-f) backward propagation direction. 
 
37 
 
Figure S5. Dispersion characteristic of cross-polarized asymmetric transmissions, backward transmission projected onto 
forward bases and additional FOMs qualifying both propagation directions in GFR configuration of Pattern-I. (a) Balanced 
and (b) differential cross-polarized AT, (c/f) backward transmission projected onto cross/co-polarized component in forward 
bases, (d) GFI-FOM, (e) GFI-FOMAT--∑-1. 
Figure S6. Dispersion characteristic of cross-polarized asymmetric transmissions, backward transmission projected onto 
forward bases and additional FOMs qualifying both propagation directions in GFR configuration of Pattern-II. (a) Balanced 
and (b) differential cross-polarized AT, (c/f) backward transmission projected onto cross/co-polarized component in forward 
bases, (d) GFI-FOM, (e) GFI-FOMAT--∑-1. 
 
 
 
 
38 
 
 
Figure S7. Side-dependent impact of tilting on optical responses of Pattern-I, transmission side. (a, d) Co-polarized 
transmission and polarization rotation in forward and backward propagation direction as well as the backward transmission 
projected onto the forward cross-polarized component, (b, e) cumulative rotation and the balanced and differential co-polarized 
asymmetric transmission, (c, f) ellipticity of outgoing beams, GFR-FOM and GFI-FOM. The dispersion characteristics of the 
(g) balanced and (h) differential asymmetric co-polarized transmission, the (i) cumulative rotation, the (j) GFR-FOM and (k) 
GFI-FOM in case of (a-c) corresponding-side and (g-j) opposite side tilting indicated on the (l) illumination schematics. 
 
39 
 
 
Figure S8. Side-dependent impact of tilting on optical responses of Pattern-II, transmission side. (a, d) Co-polarized 
transmission and polarization rotation in forward and backward propagation direction as well as the backward transmission 
projected onto the forward cross-polarized component, (b, e) cumulative rotation and the balanced and differential co-polarized 
asymmetric transmission, (c, f) ellipticity of outgoing beams, GFR-FOM and GFI-FOM. The dispersion characteristics of the 
(g) balanced and (h) differential asymmetric co-polarized transmission, the (i) cumulative rotation, the (j) GFR-FOM and (k) 
GFI-FOM in case of (a-c) corresponding-side and (g-j) opposite side tilting indicated on the (l) illumination schematics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Figure S9. Dielectric properties of Pattern-I. (a) Dielectric permittivity and permeability; (b) index of refraction and 
impedance; (c) Tellegen and chirality parameter; (f) elements of the index of refraction matrix at the GFR wavelength. 
Emulated magnetic field related pm dynamics on Pattern-I (d) co-polarized, (e) cross-polarized component, projected onto the 
GFR azimuthal orientations.  
Figure S10. Dielectric properties of Pattern-II. (a) Dielectric permittivity and permeability; (b) index of refraction and 
impedance; (c) Tellegen and chirality parameter; (f) elements of the index of refraction matrix at the GFR wavelength. 
Emulated magnetic field related pm dynamics on Pattern-II (d) co-polarized, (e) cross-polarized component, projected onto the 
GFR azimuthal orientations.  
 
41 
 
 
Figure S11. Time-evolution of the charge distribution on the periodic patterns of individual concave nanoresonators embedded 
into a gold monolayer. Concave (a, d) nanoring, (b, e) quadrumer, (c, f) miniarray embedded into gold monolayer (39 nm) in 
azimuthal orientation corresponding to (a-c) forward and (d-f) backward GFR configuration of Pattern-I (Video S1, S2). The 
charge distribution on the (g, h) top and (I, j) bottom surface of the concave miniarray pattern embedded into multilayer Pattern-
I in (g, i) forward and (h, j) backward configuration (Video S3-S6).  
Field enhancements and phase distributions 
The near-field enhancement (NFE), as well as the volume (V) corresponding to a decrease by 
a factor of 1/e and their product (NFE×V) was also determined and compared for both the 
electric and magnetic fields (Table S2). 
The comparison of NFE in Pattern-I and Pattern-II for forward and backward propagation 
directions was performed. The coupled modes on the multilayers result in: (i) a slightly larger 
VNFE in the forward propagation direction (except for the B-field in Pattern-I, where it is the 
same), (ii) slightly larger average E and B fields and NFEE&B values in the backward 
propagation direction for both patterns, which correlate with the larger polarization rotation 
and transmission, as well as with the larger classical co-polarized AT in Pattern-II, and (iii) a 
slightly larger NFE×V for E-field in the forward /backward propagation directions for Pattern-
I/II, while the same NFE×V is reached for B-field in both patterns, regardless of propagation 
direction. 
Field enhancements  
Comparison of Pattern-I and Pattern-II shows that the V is larger /the same for the E /B-field 
in Pattern-II compared to Pattern-I, in both propagation directions, except for the B-field in the 
backward propagation direction, which is smaller in Pattern-II. The NFE is almost the same, it 
is slightly larger for both E and B-fields in Pattern-I in the forward propagation direction, while 
larger NFE is reached in Pattern-II both for E and B-fields in the backward propagation 
direction.  
 
42 
 
 
Figure S12. Time-evolution of the charge distribution on the periodic patterns of individual concave nanoresonators embedded 
into a gold monolayer. Concave (a, d) nanoring, (b, e) quadrumer, (c, f) miniarray embedded into gold monolayers (39 nm) in 
azimuthal orientation corresponding to (a-c) forward and (d-f) backward GFR configuration of Pattern-II (Video S7, S8). The 
charge distribution on the (g, h) top and (I, j) bottom surface of the concave miniarray pattern embedded into multilayer Pattern-
II in (g, i) forward and (h, j) backward configuration (Video S9-S12).  
The latter correlates with the larger transmission, as well as with the larger classical AT in 
Pattern-II. The NFE and NFE×V are slightly /more pronouncedly propagation direction 
dependent for both E and B fields in Pattern-I/II, which correlates with the larger classical AT 
(except for elliptically polarized illumination in forward propagation direction), as well as with 
the larger rotation (except for linearly polarized illumination in forward propagation direction) 
in Pattern-II (Table S1 and S2).  
Pattern-I
Pattern-II
forward
backward
forward
backward
Eavg (×108 V m-1)
1.36
1.37
1.36
1.39
Bavg (T)
0.41
0.42
0.41
0.42
NFEE_avg
1.39
1.40
1.39
1.43
NFEB_avg 
1.65
1.69
1.64
1.70
VE_enh (×10-21 m-3)
3.11
3.00
3.12
3.03
VB_enh (×10-21 m-3)
3.89
3.89
3.89
3.86
NFE×VE_enh (×10-21 m-3) 
7.55
7.48
7.51
7.68
NFE×VB_enh (×10-21 m-3) 
10.1
10.1
10.1
10.1
NFEE_enh
2.43
2.50
2.41
2.54
NFEB_enh
2.59
2.60
2.59
2.62
Table S2. Field enhancements, NFE volumes, NFE×V. The volume average of the electric (Eavg) and magnetic (Bavg) field 
and the average electric (NFEE_avg) and magnetic (NFEB_avg) near-field enhancement around and inside the multilayer. The 
volume, quantifying the region where the electric and magnetic field decreases by a factor of e-1. The product of the near-field 
enhancement and the enhanced volume (NFE×V) and the near-field enhancement inside the enhanced volume (NFEE_enh and 
NFEB_enh). 
 
 
 
43 
 
Emulated magnetic field, related vorticity and helicity 
The existence of power-flow vortices indicates broken time reversal symmetry [2], while the 
helicity qualifies the difference between the numbers of right- and left-handed photons and 
represents the magneto-electric energy density [3-5]. 
 
Figure S13. Vorticity and helicity on the concave layer surfaces embedded into Pattern-I. (a-d) Vorticity and (e-h) helicity; 
(a, b and e, f) forward, (c, d and g, h) backward propagation direction; on (a, c and e, g) bottom and (b, d and f, h) top surfaces. 
Inset about the forward and backward illumination configurations. 
Intermediate and weaker /stronger vortices are recognizable around the nanocrescents in 
forward propagation direction, when Pattern-I and Pattern-II are compared. These vortices are 
stronger and more localized on the leaving (top) concave layer surfaces, especially at the 
nanocrescent tips on Pattern-II (Fig. S13a,b and Fig. S14a,b).  
Figure S14. Vorticity and helicity on the concave layer surfaces embedded into of Pattern-II. (a-d) Vorticity and (e-h) helicity; 
(a, b and e, f) forward, (c, d and g, h) backward propagation direction; on (a, c and e, g) bottom and (b, d and f, h) top surfaces. 
Inset about the forward and backward illumination configurations. 
Drain-source-like patterns are recognizable on the A-B sub-lattices on the entering (top) 
surface and strong vortices appear below the rings on the leaving (bottom) surface in backward 
direction. Remarkable difference is that additional vortices develop in B sub-lattice on the 
leaving (bottom) concave layer surface of Pattern-II (Fig. S13c,d and Fig. S14c,d).  
 
44 
 
The helicity is also well structured, four radial segments are distinguishable around the A sub-
lattice, while in the B sub-lattice well-defined separated areas of tilted helicity lines appears in 
forward propagation direction (Fig. S13e,f and Fig. S14e,f). In comparison, in Pattern-I and 
Pattern-II six radial segments are distinguishable around the A and B sub-lattice in backward 
propagation direction. An area of tilted helicity lines appears inside the B-lattice, which is of 
continuously varying orientation as in the A sub-lattice /contains drain-source-like patterns on 
the entering (top) concave layer surface in Pattern-I/II, and a well-defined separated areas of 
tilted helicity lines appears on the leaving (bottom) concave layer surface, which is more 
extended around the neighbouring nanocrescents in Pattern-II (Fig. S13g,h and Fig. S14g,h). 
Induced magnetic dipole –Pattern-I and Pattern-II: comparison of A and B sub-lattices  
 
Pattern-I 
Pattern-II 
lattice-A 
lattice-B 
lattice-A 
lattice-B 
forward 
backward 
forward 
backward 
forward 
backward 
forward 
backward 
𝑝௔௠௣_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.12 
1.22 
3.52 
3.11 
1.10 
1.11 
3.14 
3.49 
𝑝௔௠௣_௠௔௫(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.75 
1.82 
5.52 
4.88 
1.59 
1.74 
4.92 
5.48 
𝑝௫௬_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.11 
1.21 
3.47 
3.04 
1.09 
1.11 
3.11 
3.45 
𝑝௫௬_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.11 
1.21 
3.47 
3.04 
1.09 
1.11 
3.11 
3.45 
𝑝௭_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷଵ𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.18 
1.73 
5.84 
6.37 
0.448 
1.16 
3.71 
5.79 
𝑝௭_௠௔௫(× 10ିଷଵ𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.86 
2.71 
9.17 
9.98 
0.705 
1.82 
5.82 
9.09 
𝑝௖௢_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷଷ𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
-0.301 
1.09 
0.476 
1.72 
-2.91 
-2.56 
-3.49 
-5.69 
𝑝௖௢_௠௔௫(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
0.123 
0.493 
0.282 
0.624 
1.06 
0.94 
1.26 
2.44 
𝑝௖௥௢௦௦_௔௩௚(× 10ିଷଶ𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
-0.473 
0.476 
-1.25 
1.31 
0.321 
-0.399 
1.31 
-1.10 
𝑝௖௥௢௦௦_௠௔௫(× 10ିଷ଴𝐶𝑚ଶ) 
1.73 
1.77 
5.44 
4.73 
1.26 
1.46 
4.72 
4.83 
avg (°)
6.09 
7.59 
9.59 
11.72 
3.22 
6.05 
6.81 
9.59 
max (°)
11.11 
8.60 
18.56 
13.11 
8.85 
14.85 
9.73 
19.06 
Table S3. Magnetic dipole characteristics. The average and maximal magnetic dipole amplitude (pamp_avg&max), in-plane 
projected (pxy_avg&max), along propagation direction (pz_avg&max), co-polarized (pco_avg&max) and cross-polarized (pcross_avg&max) 
components, and inclination (avg&max) measured from the xy-plane of the magnetic dipole. 
The pxy components, as well as the inclinations of the pm corresponding to the A and B sub-
lattices are in intermediate (~30°) (almost the same) phase in forward propagation direction, 
while in backward propagation direction the pxy components, as well as the inclination are in 
the same (intermediate (~30°)) phase in Pattern-I (Pattern-II) (Fig. 7k,m and Fig. 8k,m). The 
pz components in the A and B sub-lattices of Pattern-I are also in intermediate (~30°) and 
almost in-phase in forward and backward propagation directions, similar to the pxy (Fig. 7l). In 
contrast, the pz components in the A and B sub-lattices in Pattern-II exhibit different phase 
tendencies, namely the A and B sub-lattices show slightly larger (~60°) and intermediate 
(~30°) phase difference in forward and backward propagation directions, respectively (Fig. 
8l). The phase shift is intermediate (~180°+/-30°) between the forward and backward 
propagation directions for both of the A and B sub-lattices, except the pxy in A sub-lattice of 
Pattern-I and Pattern-II, which are in opposite phases; and the pz in A sub-lattice of Pattern-II, 
which shows larger phase difference (~180°+/-30°) (Fig. 7k-m, Fig. 8k-m, Table S3). 
 
 
 
45 
 
Correlation between displacement and optical response asymmetry on the multilayers  
 
 
Pattern-I 
Pattern-II 
 
 (°) 
95.39 
120.06 
95.23 
65.62 
2-sided, 
linear, Dz 
asym, cx 
Dtop (C) (×10-17) 
6.56 
6.10 
6.70 
7.60 
Dbottom (C) (×10-17) 
6.29 
6.21 
6.56 
6.76* 
D (C) (×10-17) 
0.28 
-0.11 
0.14 
0.84 
D (%) 
4.28 
-1.70 
2.04 
11.75 
2-sided, 
linear, Dz 
asym, cv 
Dtop (C) (×10-16) 
1.98 
2.06 
1.97 
1.77 
Dbottom (C) (×10-16) 
1.75 
1.92 
1.75 
1.60 
D (C) (×10-17) 
2.32 
1.48 
2.21 
1.73 
D (%) 
12.47 
7.43 
11.92 
10.29 
2-sided, 
linear, 
outflow 
asym 
outtop (×10-2) 
6.5 
4.9 
6.5 
7.7 
outbottom (×10-1) 
1.14 
0.83 
1.13 
1.37 
out (×10-2) 
-5.0 
-3.5 
-4.8 
-6.0 
out (%) 
-55.6 
-52.3 
-53.8 
-55.9 
1-
sided 
asym
metry 
rot (°) 
-24.67 
-64.41 
29.60 
64.05 
ATୡ୭
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪(× 10ିହ) 
0.948 
1.81 
5.47 
2.49 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୡ୪ୟୱୱ୧ୡୟ୪(× 10ିସ) 
0.611 
1.16 
0.122 
5.29 
Table S4. Correlation between the normal component of the displacement current - Dz and optical responses asymmetry. The 
 azimuthal orientation, normal component of the displacement current vector on the top (Dtop) and bottom (Dbottom) surface of 
the concave (cv) and convex (cx) layers in case of two-sided linearly polarized plane-wave illumination. The displacement 
current difference (𝛥𝐷= 𝐷௧௢௣−𝐷௕௢௧௧௢௠) and asymmetry ratio (𝛿𝐷=
ଶ∗(஽೟೚೛ି஽್೚೟೟೚೘)
஽೟೚೛ା஽್೚೟೟೚೘×100). The outgoing intensity on the 
top (outtop) and bottom (outbottom) regions, their difference (𝛥𝑜𝑢𝑡= 𝑜𝑢𝑡௧௢௣−𝑜𝑢𝑡௕௢௧௧௢௠) and asymmetry ratio (𝛿𝑜𝑢𝑡=
ଶ∗(௢௨௧೟೚೛ି௢௨௧್೚೟೟೚೘)
௢௨௧೟೚೛ା௢௨௧್೚೟೟೚೘×100). The polarization rotation (rot), classical co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟) and cross-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௖௟௔௦௦௜௖௔௟) 
asymmetric transmission (AT). 
In Pattern-I at the GFR condition no well-defined correlation is observed between the normal 
component of the displacement vector and the rotation, the classical asymmetrical co-polarized 
transmission, either on the convex or on the concave layer. The asymmetry of the normal 
component of the displacement vector correlates solely with the |outflow| observed under two-
sided illumination on both layers (Dz_convex&concave~outflow), which is larger in forward 
configuration, though the outflow is reversal. However, when the maximum values of the 
classical asymmetrical co-polarised transmission ATcoclassical are inspected, the ratio is reversed 
for the two propagation directions for ATcoclassical as well as for Dz_convex of Pattern-I. As a 
consequence, on the concave layer the classical asymmetrical co-polarised transmission shows 
correlation with the asymmetry of the normal component displacement vector (Dz_concave ~ 
ATcoclassical) in the forward configuration, hence Pattern-I is similar to Pattern-II (Table S4). 
In Pattern-II the rotation, the ATcrossclassical /outflow under single /two sided illumination, 
correlates with the asymmetry of the normal component of the displacement vector on the 
convex layer (Dz_convex~ATcrossclassical /outflow), namely all of them are larger in backward 
configuration, however the outflow is reversal. In comparison, on the concave layer the 
classical asymmetrical co-polarised transmission for single-sided illumination shows 
correlation with the asymmetry of the normal component displacement vector (Dz_concave ~ 
ATcoclassical), namely it is larger in the forward configuration (Table S4). 
 
46 
 
Figure S15. Optical responses of Pattern-II-active, transmission side. (a, d, g) Cross-polarized transmission in forward and 
backward propagation direction as well as the backward transmission projected onto the forward co-polarized component, (b, 
e, h) balanced and differential cross-polarized asymmetric transmission (triangular symbols indicate regions, where the 
backward transmission is larger), (c, f, i) GFI-FOM-activemixed, GFI-FOM-activebalanced and GFI-FOM-activeinverse. (a-c) 
Wavelength independent, (d-f) wavelength dependent active Pattern-II and (g-i) wavelength dependent active dimerized 
Pattern-II configuration. 
 
 
 
47 
 
 
Pattern-II-active 
Pattern-II-dimerized 
Tୡ୭
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିଶ) 
4.71 
0.88 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିଶ)
2.7 
1.2 
T୤୳୪୪
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ିଶ) 
7.40 
2.1 
Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓୠ 
1.4 
1.01 
Tୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୠ_ஓୠ
1.84 
0.40 
T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓୠ 
3.24 
1.41 
T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୭
ஓୠ→ஓ୤(× 10ିଷ) 
65.6 
3.45 
T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ஓୠ→ஓ୤
 
3.18 
1.41 
T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ஓୠ→ஓ୤
/Tୡ୭
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ଵ) 
6.747 
16.048 
Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓୠ/Tୡ୭
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ଵ)
2.973 
11.488 
T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓୠ/T୤୳୪୪
୤_ஓ୤(× 10ଵ) 
4.378 
6.669 
ATୡ୭
ୠୟ୪ୟ୬ୡୣୢ 
1.35 
1.00 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୠୟ୪ୟ୬ୡୣୢ 
1.82 
0.29 
ATୡ୭
ୢ୧୤୤ୣ୰ୣ୬୲୧ୟ୪ 
3.13 
1.40 
ATୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ୢ୧୤୤ୣ୰ୣ୬୲୧ୟ୪(× 10ିଷ) 
38.6 
8.97 
rotf (°) 
-35.55 
-54.91 
rotb (°) 
-49.02 
-32.32 
 (°) 
-84.57 
-87.23 
f (°) 
-16.53 
-29.87 
b (°) 
6.16 
0.59 
GFR-FOM
0.21 
0.266 
GFI-FOM|backward| (×10-3)
5.97 
8.13 
GFI-FOM-activecross (×10-3) 
5.70 
7.90 
GFI-FOM-activemixed (×10-3) 
5.82 
7.91 
GFI-FOM-activebalanced (×10-3) 
3.35 
2.74 
GFI-FOM-activeinverse (×10-3) 
5.18 
4.05 
Q-factor (Tୡ୭
ୠ_ஓୠ) 
291.91 
448.66 
Q-factor (T୤୳୪୪
ୠ_ஓୠ) 
281.73 
423.14 
Q-factor (T୤୳୪୪→ୡ୰୭ୱୱ
ஓୠ→ஓ୤
) 
294.45 
432.35 
Table S5. Active multilayer optical response parameters: transmission, polarization rotation and FOMs at extrema. The co-
polarized (Tco), cross-polarized (Tcross) and total (Tfull) transmissions where the superscript indicates forward (f) and backward 
(b) propagation direction for azimuthal orientation corresponding to forward (f) and backward (b) configurations. The 
transmission in backward propagation direction projected onto the co-polarized (𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௢
ఊ௕→ఊ௙) and cross-polarized (𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ௕→ఊ௙
) 
component of forward direction. The 𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ௕→ఊ௙
/𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ௙, 𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ௕/𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ௙ and 𝑇௧௢௧
௕_ఊ௕/𝑇௧௢௧
௙_ఊ௙ transmission ratios indicating isolator 
properties. The balanced co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௖௢
௕_ఊ್) and cross-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕௔௟௔௡௖௘ௗ= 𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௕_ఊ್), the 
differential co-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௢
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௖௢
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
) and cross-polarized (𝐴𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௖௥௢௦௦
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௢
ఊ್→ ఊ೑), and 
total (𝐴𝑇௙௨௟௟
ௗ௜௙௙௘௥௘௡௧௜௔௟= 𝑇௙௨௟௟
௙_ఊ೑−𝑇௙௨௟௟→௖௥௢௦௦
ఊ್→ ఊ೑
) asymmetrical transmissions. The polarization rotations and ellipticity in forward 
(rotf and f) and backward (rotb and b) propagation directions, the cumulative rotation (). The used FOMs qualifying the 
Generalized Faraday Rotation (GFR) and Generalized Faraday Isolator (GFI) properties of the active multilayers and the Q-
factor of the emission peak for the quantities inside the brackets. 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
References 
1. Z. Wang, K. Yao, M. Chen, H. Chen, and Y. Liu, “Manipulating Smith-Purcell Emission 
with Babinet Metasurfaces,” Physical Review Letters, no. 117 (2016): 157401. 
2. E. O. Kamenetskii, “Magnetoelectric Energy in Electrodynamics: Magnetoelectricity, 
Bi(an)isotropy, and Magnetoelectric Meta-Atoms,” Annalen der Physik, no. 535 (2023): 
2300287. 
3. E. O. Kamenetskii, “Quantization of magnetoelectric fields,” Journal of Modern Optics, no. 
66 (2019): 909-928. 
4. A. F. Ranada, “Topological electromagnetism,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and 
General, no. 25 (1992): 1621.  
5. J. L. Trueba, and A. F. Ranada, “The electromagnetic helicity,” European Journal of 
Physics, no. 17 (1996): 141.  
