Anisotropic interactions induce dynamical arrest in artificial colloidal ice.
Leonardo G. Alanis-Cant´u and Antonio Ortiz-Ambriz∗
Tecnologico de Monterrey, Escuela de Ingenier´ıa y Ciencias
Ave.
Eugenio Garza Sada 2501, Monterrey, 64849, M´exico.
(Dated: June 2, 2026)
Artificial Colloidal Ice is an ice-like system used to study the effects of frustration in controlled
environments where all degrees of freedom can be accessed at a length-scale large enough for optical
visualization and in real time. We modify this model system by inducing anisotropic interactions
through an in-plane magnetic field.
In this new regime, the system has a well-defined ground
state consisting of a checkerboard pattern of fully charged vertices. However, Brownian Dynamics
simulations are unable to reach this ground state and instead remain frozen in metastable disordered
states, even in the absence of quenched disorder in the lattice. This arrest is caused by the local
magnetic enhancement of the potential barrier that the particles need to cross to find a lower energy
state.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The spin glass model was introduced in 1975 [1] to ex-
plain the unusual behavior of the specific heat in dilute
magnetic alloys observed in the late 50s and early 60s
[2, 3]. In this model, the Ising spins interact on a lattice
through random coupling energies that produce a corru-
gated potential landscape in phase space. The quenched
disorder produces low-energy states that lack long-range
order but have long relaxation times, effectively mak-
ing them frozen in time.
Quenched disorder typically
plays a significant role in the freezing mechanism, as has
been showed experimentally in materials like URh2Ge2
where the exhibited spin freezing can be lifted when the
source of disorder is removed [4]. However, macroscopic
signatures of spin freezing have also been observed in
very pure samples of bulk materials with no disorder,
such as PrAu2Si2[5], Gadolinium Gallium Garnet (GGG)
[6], various magnetic materials [7–9], and magnetic Py-
rochlores [10–14]. The origins of this unconventional spin
freezing appear to be multiple, from induced dynamical
disorder [15] to lattice distortions induced by fluctuations
[16, 17].
Artificial Ice systems are engineered to study geometric
frustration in a controlled environment. In Artificial Spin
Ice (ASI), ferromagnetic elongated nanoislands are fabri-
cated such that they are uniformly magnetized in one di-
rection. These nanoislands can then be arranged in many
different spatial configurations to obtain very diverse be-
haviors [18–22], including glass transitions [23, 24], and
ergodicity breaking [25]. Artificial Colloidal Ice (ACI),
on the other hand, is composed of interacting colloidal
particles confined to move inside bistable potentials [26].
This system is similar to ASI, but the configuration is
easier to observe experimentally as colloidal particles can
usually be seen through an optical microscope, and their
interactions are tunable [27]. An analogy between both
systems can be made by considering the empty space in
∗aortiza@tec.mx
the bistable potential as a negative topological charge
and then defining a dipole for each trap. It was shown
in Refs.
[28] that for infinite, single coordination lat-
tices with isotropically repulsive particles, the topolog-
ical dipoles in ACI are energetically equivalent to the
magnetic dipoles in ASI.
Experimentally, ACI is realized by placing superpara-
magnetic colloids in lithographically etched grooves, and
generating an external magnetic field that induces the in-
teractions. When the magnetic field is perpendicular to
the plane where particles sediment, the interactions are
isotropic and repulsive. Most studies of colloidal ice have
maintained this regime, either with such a magnetic field
[27, 29, 30] or by considering electrically charged colloids
[31]. For a review of particle ice systems, the reader is
referred to Ref. [26].
In this study we perform simulations that break this
condition by applying an in-plane magnetic field, which
causes the interaction between colloidal particles to be-
come anisotropic and to have both attractive and repul-
sive regions, as shown in Fig. 1. This causes the system
to arrest, even in the absence of any quenched disorder;
that is, even if the system has a definite ground state, it
will fall into a metastable state, where due to the local re-
pulsive force, the particles are unable to find a clear path
to their lowest energy configuration.
The system will
then stop evolving and stay in this configuration for a
very long time. We find that these long-lived metastable
states appear due to the local increase in the potential
barrier produced by the anisotropic interactions, even if
the underlying lattice remains completely ordered, which
makes this mechanism distinct from the one used to ex-
plain spin freezing in Refs. [15, 16].
II.
METHODS
For our simulations, we use Brownian Dynamics to
compute the position ri of particle i at each timestep
by integrating the overdamped equations of motion.
γ dri
dt = Fdd
i
+ Ftrap
i
+ η,
(1)
arXiv:2606.02439v1  [cond-mat.soft]  1 Jun 2026
2
θ
Figure 1. Schematic of the system. a) Colloidal particles are
placed in double-well traps with induced magnetic moments
pointing along the x axis. b) The in-plane magnetic field pro-
duces mixed attractive (blue) and repulsive (red) anisotropic
interactions interactions at the single-vertex level.
c) The
system is arranged in a square lattice such that the magnetic
field falls on one of the base vectors. The depicted arrange-
ment corresponds to the ground-state configuration under the
studied conditions.
where γ = kBT/D is the drag coefficient with diffusion
constant D = 0.14µ2m/s and η is a random variable
representing the thermal noise, with zero mean ⟨η⟩= 0,
and ⟨η(t)η(t′)⟩= 4kBTγδ(t−t′); in this case, T = 300K.
The term Ftrap
i
arises from a bistable potential, like the
one illustrated in Fig. 1a) with two components of the
force vector: one parallel to the direction of the trap ˆe∥
and one perpendicular to the direction of the trap ˆe⊥
which prevents the colloids from jumping to other traps.
The full expression is:
Ftrap
i
= −ktrapr⊥ˆe⊥
−ˆe∥
(
−khillr∥
|r∥| ≤d/2,
ktrap(|r∥| −d/2)sgn(r∥)
|r∥| > d/2,(2)
where d = 3µm is the trap separation, ktrap = 0.1pN/nm
is the stiffness, and khill = 8h/d2 with h = 8pN·nm being
the height of the central hill.
The traps are arranged
vertically and horizontally in a 2D square lattice with
lattice constant a = 8.374µm as shown in Fig: 1c).
The term Fdd
i
represents the magnetic dipole-dipole
interactions, described by the potential
Uij = −µ0m2
4πr3
ij

3 cos2 ϕ −1

,
(3)
where m is the magnetic moment of the colloids, given
by m = V χB/µ0, and ϕ is the angle between the mag-
netic field vector, B and the vector joining both particles
rij = ri −rj. The angle θ is the polar angle between the
magnetic field and the vertical direction, ˆz In the expres-
sion for the magnetic moment, V is the colloid volume,
and χ is the susceptibility. In our setup, colloidal parti-
cles have a radius of r = 1.4µm and magnetic suscepti-
bility χ = 0.4, in agreement with values measured with
commercially available particles [32]. We neglect many
body effects in our simulations, as particles are never
close enough for these to be significant. All simulations
were made with a timestep of 0.1ms and a sample size
of n = 30 vertices per side, i.e. 1800 particles. These
parameters were chosen to match what is experimentally
available, except for the system size, the choice of peri-
odic boundary conditions, and the variance of the central
hill, which in our case is σh = 0.
When the magnetic field is applied along one of the lat-
tice basis vectors, it generates regions of attractive and
repulsive interactions, separated by the so-called magic
angle ϕ = 54.7◦, as illustrated in Fig. 1b). In a 4-in or 4-
out vertex, all nearest-neighbor particles meet at an angle
ϕ = 45 deg < ϕc, so their interactions are attractive. In
consequence, particles in neighboring traps aligned with
the magnetic field interact attractively, whereas particles
in collinear traps perpendicular to the field experience re-
pulsion. For traps oriented perpendicular to each other,
the interaction can be either attractive or repulsive, de-
pending on the relative positions of the particles.
For
example, as shown in Fig. 1b), when the particle in the
horizontal trap is fixed close to the vertex, and the parti-
cle in the vertical trap is in the nearest stable point, they
interact attractively, while when the vertical particle is in
the opposite end of the trap, the interaction is attractive.
Although next-nearest-neighbor interactions across the
vertex are mixed, they are weaker and won’t overcome
the energetic gain associated with bringing all particles
close to the vertex. As a result, vertices with all parti-
cles pointing in or out are energetically favored, and we
expect to observe predominantly charged vertices.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
With this relatively complicated interaction, we begin
by estimating the energy hierarchy of all vertex types.
This is non-trivial because the appearance of charged
vertices (Types I, II, V, and VI, as defined in Fig. 2), nec-
essarily produce vertices with the opposite charge. The
values shown in Fig. 2 a) are calculated by a procedure
similar to that of Refs. [28, 29]. For each vertex, the
naive energy is given by the sum of all pair interactions
between its components.
The effective energy, Eeff, is
calculated as the average between the naive energies of
the vertex and its complement; that is, the vertex that
appears from flipping all the particles.
Using this procedure we reproduce the vertex hierar-
chy known for a field orthogonal to the particle’s plane
(θ = 0), as shown in Fig.
2 b).
Consequently, this
model predicts that in our setup (θ = 90 deg), the ex-
pected ground state is composed of highly charged ver-
tices of types I and VI. Furthermore, we can plug the
effective energy of vertex type v into the Boltzmann re-
3
Figure 2. a) Color-coded vertex types with their correspond-
ing geometric vertex energy E(v)/B2 with an in-plane field
direction on the x axis. b) Vertex energies with increasing
tilting angle θ starting in the isotropic regime, i.e. orthogonal
to the particle’s plane. c) Vertices fraction with increasing
magnetic field grouped by topological charge, for the mean-
field model (solid, —) line, fast simulations at ˙B = 33.3µT/s
(-♦-), and slow simulations (-•-) at ˙B = 0.333µT/s.
lation, P(v) ∼exp(−E(v)/kBT), to obtain the relative
fraction of vertices of each type that are expected in a
system in an equilibrium state. These expected vertex
counts are shown as a solid line in Fig. 2 c), where it can
be seen that at a field of B = 3mT, the equilibrium con-
figuration should be composed purely of types I and VI.
For the square lattice, this ground state is twofold degen-
erate and can be realized by arranging q = ±4 topological
charges antiferromagnetically in a checkerboard pattern,
as illustrated in Fig. 1c).
Here we should note that this process of adjusting the
energy hierarchy by modifying the system symmetry has
been proposed in Refs. [29, 33]. Specifically, Ref. [33]
applies an external field that tilts the whole potential
landscape and favors some vertices of type IV instead
of type III. At high values of the external field, this re-
sults in a new ferromagnetic ground state, where all spins
point towards one corner, saturating the magnetization.
We note here that our approach cannot be described as
an external field, since the changes in the potential land-
scape can’t be reduced to a force that depends only on
a point in space. Instead, what we are modifying is the
symmetry of the pair interactions in a way that breaks
rotational symmetry but preserves inversion symmetry.
To realize the simulations, the system was initialized
in a random configuration, and then the field was in-
creased at a constant quench rate ˙B. Two quench pro-
tocols were realized at different rates: a fast protocol at
˙B = 33.3µT/s and a slow protocol at ˙B = 0.333µT/s.
Note that even in the case of the fast protocol, the time
taken to reach 5mT is around 2.5 minutes, while for slow
quench it’s more than 4 hours. After the quench both
systems are allowed to relax for one hour at a constant
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 3.
Vertex Maps of the last frame of simulations in
quenched anisitropic colloidal ice for fast (a,b) and slow (c,d)
quenches. In panes a) and c), topological charges are directly
colored corresponding to the colormap in Fig. 2. In b) and d)
their color indicates to the value of their local antiferromag-
netic order parameter, with negative vertices shown as green,
and positive vertices as purple.
Regions with deep purple
or green color indicate domains of incompatible ground state
configuration.
field of Bf = 5mT.
Figure 2 shows how both protocols deviate strongly
from the model, even if they stop their evolution at
around the same field value B ≈3mT. The fast quench
produces slightly more vertices of types II and V than of
the expected ground state, I and V, while the slow quench
slightly increases the fraction of ground state vertices,
but the final fraction is still around 0.6. The fact that
slowing down the quench produces results closer to the
model indicates that something in the dynamics prevents
the system from reaching the ground state.
It might
be that there is a quench rate slow enough to allow the
system to equilibrate; however, the modest improvement
from 2.5 minutes to 4 hours suggests that the time re-
quired to achieve the ground state is likely impracticable.
We observe a typical spatial distribution of the final
state in Fig. 3. In panels a) and c), we show the vertices
according to the color scheme of Fig. 2. In this, the deep
blue squares correspond to vertices of types I and VI and,
therefore, to regions of local ground state configuration.
All the pale blue and orange vertices are defects, with or-
ange points being vertices of neutral charge. From these
maps, we can conclude that the fast-quenched system is
in a very disordered state, with domains of ground state
vertices almost as large as defects. The slow quench is
more ordered, with defects scattered on a field of ground
state vertices.
4
5
10
∆r/a
10−4
10−2
100
Cij
100
101
102
∆t[s]
10−1
100
Eij
0
5
B
103
104
τ[s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
B[mT]
0
2
4
B [mT]
0
2
4
lc/a
0
1800
3600
∆t [s]
slow
fast
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4. (a) Logarithmic plot of spin-spin spatial correlation
functions for the slow quench and (b) Edwards-Anderson pa-
rameter at different magnetic fields. The translucent lines are
calculated from the simulation, and solid lines are a fit to a
stretched exponential function exp
h
−(∆t/τ)βi
. (c) Correla-
tion length obtained by fitting the spatial correlation func-
tions with an exponential function, for both slow and fast
simulations. The left panel shows how the correlation length
remains steady at a constant field for an hour after the quench.
The domain structure becomes more evident when we
plot a local order parameter in panels b) and d). Spa-
tially, the ground state of the system is composed of a
checkerboard pattern of vertices of types I and VI. We
define the local order parameter
κx,y = (−1)x+yqxy,
(4)
where (x, y) are the components of the position vector
in lattice units, and qxy is the charge of the vertex at
position (x, y).
This order parameter acquires a value
of ±1 when the vertices are ordered according to the
ground state and a value of 0 for defects.
As before,
we can observe that the fast quench produces a nearly
completely disordered structure, while the slow quench
almost reaches a structure composed of two interpen-
etrated domains with scattered charged defects inside.
The evolution of this order parameter for both quench
rates can be seen in the videos S1 and S2.
To characterize the size of the domains we compute
the spin-spin correlation function as follows:
C(rij) = |⟨σi · σj⟩| .
(5)
In Fig. 4a) we show the correlation functions for the slow
quench simulations and see that these have generally de-
caying exponential functional forms, although for very
low fields these correlations show almost only noise. We
fit these functions with an exponential exp (−rij/lc) to
obtain the correlation length: that is, a measure of the
average size of ordered regions in the lattice. By plotting
lc in Fig. 4c), we can observe how, in both slow and fast
quenches, the ordered domains start growing but satu-
rate for fields greater than ∼2mT in agreement with the
vertex counts from Fig: 2 c). The correlation length can
grow up to three lattice sites for slow quenches, but stays
lower than one lattice site for fast quenches, indicating
the system does evolve from its random configuration,
but maintains a strongly disordered state. This contrasts
with the observations of Ref. [34], where the number of
defects decreases due to the motion of the domain walls.
After the quench, the correlation length remains constant
for up to an hour at constant field. This can also be seen
in the second half of videos S1 and S2.
Figure 4b) shows the Edwards-Anderson parameter for
several values of the field. This data required a different
protocol, where the field was increased in discrete steps.
This allowed the system to evolve for some time in a given
field so that the time correlation could be calculated as:
E(∆t) = ⟨ri(t)ri(t + ∆t)⟩,
(6)
where the average is taken over t and i. Surprisingly, par-
ticles still exhibit some mobility even at high fields, where
the vertex dynamics have effectively stopped evolving.
However, this reflects the local jumping of specific par-
ticles that have no consequence on the overall domain
structure. The slowing down of the relaxation appears
to be similar to that observed experimentally in strongly
confined microgel particles [35]. However, in that sys-
tem, spin-lattice distortions appear from the quasi-2D
displacements, which are not present in our system. The
inset in Fig. 4b) shows the relaxation times τ as the field
increases.
To calculate it, we fit the time correlation
with a stretched exponential function, exp
h
−(∆t/τ)βi
,
shown in the figure as solid lines over the simulation
data. The relaxation time clearly increases several or-
ders of magnitude as the field increases, which indicates
that the system’s dynamics become arrested. The precise
functional form, and the point at which τ diverges is left
for future work.
The spin freezing we observe arises due to thermal fluc-
tuations at zero and low fields. Under these conditions,
particles can jump between two equilibrium positions as
the central hill barrier is in the order of ∼2kBT. As
the field increases, the potential landscape experienced
by each particle changes significantly, making transitions
between the two positions a rare event, even if the sys-
tem’s energetics favor one position considerably over the
other.
To demonstrate this concept, Fig.
5 illustrates the
modified potential of a vertical trap inside a single-vertex
(left) and two coupled vertices (right). The potential is
calculated along the direction of the trap highlighted in
magenta. In both cases, as the field increases, the poten-
tial barrier between the two states increases, resulting
5
Figure 5. Modified Potentials for a single vertex (left) and two
coupled vertices (right) with increasing magnetic field when
the highlighted particle is moved across the trap. The inset
shows the trap’s height ˜h = h/kBT with squared field B2.
The left panel shows the large increase in the potential barrier
necessary to cross to the minimum energy configuration.
in a decrease in the transition probability, even though
one of the stable positions is more energetic than the
other. The inset on the single-vertex shows the height of
the potential barrier ˜h = h/kBT measured at the cen-
ter of the trap, which increases linearly with B2. In the
single-vertex case, we observe that the potential going
from +d/2 →−d/2 consists of a long and shallow hill
and a sudden drop as we approach d/2.
This implies
that, as previously computed, q = +4 vertices are more
stable, but q = +2 vertices remain metastable due to
the energetic barrier preventing transitions to the ground
state. When a second vertex is added, the ground state
keeps being a combination of charges q = ±4, however,
the metastable position d/2 is separated by a higher hill,
making the ±2 vertex pair more stable.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we studied the anisotropic regime in Ar-
tificial Colloidal Ice using both theory and simulations.
Our model suggest that when the magnetic field points in
the direction of a lattice vector, the system has a ground
state that locally maximizes the topological charge, thus
forming an antiferromagnetic configuration of ±4 charges
arranged in a checkerboard pattern. However, Brownian
Dynamics simulations show that instead, the system be-
comes arrested in a metastable, disordered state, deviat-
ing significantly from the equilibrium theoretical predic-
tions. Slower quenching rates improved agreement with
the models, indicating that the intrinsic dynamics of the
system prevented it from reaching equilibrium.
The temporal correlations show that, as the field in-
creases, the timescale for the spin flips diverges, and the
system falls to a frozen state that stops evolving.
In
disorder-free spin glass materials, it has been observed
that freezing arises from small lattice distortions that in-
duce enough disorder in the interactions for a glass state
to appear, as observed in Y2Mo2O7 [16].
In our sys-
tem such fluctuations are not present, because the traps
are fixed in space, and instead the frozen state arises
from magnetic interactions themselves; as the system is
cooled, the potential barrier between the two equilibrium
positions increases, eventually becoming large enough
to prevent particles from thermally exploring the phase
space, revealing a different type of spin freezing with-
out quenched disorder. This mechanism deviates signif-
icantly from the one observed in other colloidal mod-
els [35–37] where the glassiness is induced by very short
range interactions between anisotropic particles, or by
the interaction with a confinement, as well as from the
mechanisms known to produce freezing in spin glass ma-
terials [16, 17]. Our system produces a dynamical freez-
ing in a system with only one degree of freedom per par-
ticle. This reduced dimensionality allowed us to observe
precisely the rise in the potential barrier that arrests the
motion, while keeping the collective nature of the ob-
served phenomena. We expect that our system can be
used as model system for more complicated glassy sys-
tems.
Additionally, we note that the behavior we observe
here is markedly different from that shown in isotropic
colloidal ice [34], where slower quenches also produced
larger domains, but these domains continued to coarsen
over time. The fact that our system freezes and stops
evolving could make it suitable to observe the scalings
predicted by the Kibble-Zurek mechanism [38] by over-
coming the difficulties observed in Ref. [34], where the
coarsening of the domains after the transition meant that
the characteristic lengthscale kept growing with time. We
leave this research avenue for a future study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Carolina Rodriguez-Gallo, Pietro Tierno,
Yusheng Lei, and Xuan Feng for their fruitful discussions.
LGAC acknowledges support from SECIHTI under its
graduate scholarship program.
[1] S. F. Edwards and P. W. Anderson, Theory of spin
glasses, J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. 5, 965 (1975).
[2] J. De Nobel and F. Du Chatenier, Specific heats of dilute
alloys of manganese in silver and copper at low temper-
6
atures and in magnetic fields, Physica 25, 969 (1959).
[3] J. Zimmerman and F. Hoare, Low-temperature specific
heat of dilute Cu-Mn alloys, Journal of Physics and
Chemistry of Solids 17, 52 (1960).
[4] S. S¨ullow, G. J. Nieuwenhuys, A. A. Menovsky, J. A.
Mydosh, S. A. M. Mentink, T. E. Mason, and W. J. L.
Buyers, Spin Glass Behavior in URh 2 Ge 2, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78, 354 (1997).
[5] A. Krimmel, J. Hemberger, M. Nicklas, G. Knebel,
W. Trinkl,
M. Brando,
V. Fritsch,
A. Loidl, and
E. Ressouche, Spin-glass behavior in PrAu 2 Si 2, Phys.
Rev. B 59, R6604 (1999).
[6] P. Schiffer, A. P. Ramirez, D. A. Huse, P. L. Gammel,
U. Yaron, D. J. Bishop, and A. J. Valentino, Frustra-
tion Induced Spin Freezing in a Site-Ordered Magnet:
Gadolinium Gallium Garnet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2379
(1995).
[7] E. A. Goremychkin, R. Osborn, B. D. Rainford, R. T.
Macaluso, D. T. Adroja, and M. Koza, Spin-glass or-
der induced by dynamic frustration, Nature Phys 4, 766
(2008).
[8] M. Hadouchi, A. Assani, M. Saadi, Y. Kopelevich, R. R.
Da Silva, A. Lahmar, H. Bouyanfif, M. El Marssi, and
L. El Ammari, Unconventional spin-glass-like state in
AgCo2V3O10, the novel magnetically frustrated mate-
rial, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 491,
165623 (2019).
[9] X.-M. Zhang, C.-R. Li, X.-H. Zhang, W.-X. Zhang, and
X.-M. Chen, Unusual Slow Magnetic Relaxation in He-
lical Co3 (OH)2 Ferrimagnetic Chain Based Cobalt Hy-
droxysulfates, Chem. Mater. 20, 2298 (2008).
[10] B. D. Gaulin, J. N. Reimers, T. E. Mason, J. E. Greedan,
and Z. Tun, Spin freezing in the geometrically frustrated
pyrochlore antiferromagnet Tb 2 Mo 2 O 7, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 69, 3244 (1992).
[11] N. P. Raju, E. Gmelin, and R. K. Kremer, Magnetic-
susceptibility and specific-heat studies of spin-glass-like
ordering in the pyrochlore compounds R 2 Mo 2 O 7 ( R
=Y, Sm, or Gd), Phys. Rev. B 46, 5405 (1992).
[12] J. N. Reimers, J. E. Greedan, R. K. Kremer, E. Gmelin,
and M. A. Subramanian, Short-range magnetic ordering
in the highly frustrated pyrochlore Y 2 Mn 2 O 7, Phys.
Rev. B 43, 3387 (1991).
[13] J. Snyder, J. S. Slusky, R. J. Cava, and P. Schiffer, How
‘spin ice’ freezes, Nature 413, 48 (2001).
[14] J. Snyder, B. G. Ueland, J. S. Slusky, H. Karunadasa,
R. J. Cava, and P. Schiffer, Low-temperature spin freez-
ing in the Dy 2 Ti 2 O 7 spin ice, Phys. Rev. B 69, 064414
(2004).
[15] P. M. Thygesen, J. A. Paddison, R. Zhang, K. A. Beyer,
K. W. Chapman, H. Y. Playford, M. G. Tucker, D. A.
Keen, M. A. Hayward, and A. L. Goodwin, Orbital Dimer
Model for the Spin-Glass State in Y 2 Mo 2 O 7, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 118, 067201 (2017).
[16] K. Mitsumoto, C. Hotta, and H. Yoshino, Spin-Orbital
Glass Transition in a Model of a Frustrated Pyrochlore
Magnet without Quenched Disorder, Phys. Rev. Lett.
124, 087201 (2020).
[17] K. Mitsumoto and H. Yoshino, Replica theory for
disorder-free spin-lattice glass transition on a treelike
simplex network, Phys. Rev. B 107, 054412 (2023).
[18] R. F. Wang, C. Nisoli, R. S. Freitas, J. Li, W. McConville,
B. J. Cooley, M. S. Lund, N. Samarth, C. Leighton, V. H.
Crespi, and P. Schiffer, Artificial ‘spin ice’ in a geometri-
cally frustrated lattice of nanoscale ferromagnetic islands,
Nature 439, 303 (2006), tex.ids: wang artificial 2006.
[19] Y. Lao, F. Caravelli, M. Sheikh, J. Sklenar, D. Gardeaza-
bal, J. D. Watts, A. M. Albrecht, A. Scholl, K. Dahmen,
C. Nisoli, and P. Schiffer, Classical topological order in
the kinetics of artificial spin ice, Nature Phys 14, 723
(2018).
[20] N. Rougemaille, F. Montaigne, B. Canals, A. Dulu-
ard, D. Lacour, M. Hehn, R. Belkhou, O. Fruchart,
S. El Moussaoui, A. Bendounan, and F. Maccherozzi, Ar-
tificial Kagome Arrays of Nanomagnets: A Frozen Dipo-
lar Spin Ice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 057209 (2011).
[21] E. Mengotti, L. J. Heyderman, A. F. Rodr´ıguez, F. Nolt-
ing, R. V. H¨ugli, and H.-B. Braun, Real-space obser-
vation of emergent magnetic monopoles and associated
Dirac strings in artificial kagome spin ice, Nature Phys
7, 68 (2011), tex.ids: mengotti realspace 2011a.
[22] M. S. Andersson, S. D. Pappas, H. Stopfel, E. ¨Ostman,
A. Stein, P. Nordblad, R. Mathieu, B. Hj¨orvarsson, and
V. Kapaklis, Thermally induced magnetic relaxation in
square artificial spin ice, Sci Rep 6, 37097 (2016).
[23] S. A. Morley, D. Alba Venero, J. M. Porro, S. T. Ri-
ley, A. Stein, P. Steadman, R. L. Stamps, S. Langridge,
and C. H. Marrows, Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann freezing of
a thermally fluctuating artificial spin ice probed by x-
ray photon correlation spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 95,
104422 (2017).
[24] M. Saccone, F. Caravelli, K. Hofhuis, S. Parchenko,
Y. A. Birkh¨olzer, S. Dhuey, A. Kleibert, S. Van Dijken,
C. Nisoli, and A. Farhan, Direct observation of a dynam-
ical glass transition in a nanomagnetic artificial Hopfield
network, Nat. Phys. 18, 517 (2022).
[25] M. Saccone, F. Caravelli, K. Hofhuis, S. Dhuey, A. Scholl,
C. Nisoli, and A. Farhan, Real-space observation of er-
godicity transitions in artificial spin ice, Nat Commun
14, 5674 (2023).
[26] A. Ortiz-Ambriz, C. Nisoli, C. Reichhardt, C. J. Reich-
hardt, and P. Tierno, Colloquium : Ice rule and emergent
frustration in particle ice and beyond, Rev. Mod. Phys.
91, 041003 (2019).
[27] A. Ortiz-Ambriz and P. Tierno, Engineering of frustra-
tion in colloidal artificial ices realized on microfeatured
grooved lattices, Nat. Commun. 7, 10575 (2016).
[28] C. Nisoli, Unexpected Phenomenology in Particle-Based
Ice Absent in Magnetic Spin Ice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
167205 (2018).
[29] E. C. O˘guz, A. Ortiz-Ambriz, H. Shem-Tov, E. Babi`a-
Soler, P. Tierno, and Y. Shokef, Topology Restricts
Quasidegeneracy in Sheared Square Colloidal Ice, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 238003 (2020).
[30] C. Rodr´ıguez-Gallo, A. Ortiz-Ambriz, C. Nisoli, and
P. Tierno, Geometrical control of topological charge
transfer in Shakti-Cairo colloidal ice, Commun Phys 6,
113 (2023).
[31] A. Lib´al, C. Reichhardt, and C. J. O. Reichhardt, Real-
izing Colloidal Artificial Ice on Arrays of Optical Traps,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 228302 (2006).
[32] F. Martinez-Pedrero, A. Ortiz-Ambriz, I. Pagonabarraga,
and P. Tierno, Colloidal Microworms Propelling via a
Cooperative Hydrodynamic Conveyor Belt, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 115, 138301 (2015).
[33] M. Ostinato and P. Tierno, Tracking topological defects
in a plasma state of a quenched colloidal ice, Phys. Rev.
7
B 111, 014414 (2025).
[34] A. Libal, A. del Campo, C. Nisoli, C. Reichhardt, and
C. J. O. Reichhardt, Quenched Dynamics of Artificial
Spin Ice: Coarsening versus Kibble-Zurek, Phys. Rev.
Research 2, 033433 (2020), arXiv: 1908.05328.
[35] Y. Han, Y. Shokef, A. M. Alsayed, P. Yunker, T. C.
Lubensky, and A. G. Yodh, Geometric frustration in
buckled colloidal monolayers, Nature 456, 898 (2008).
[36] J. Liang, X. Feng, N. Zheng, H. Wang, R. Ni, and
Z. Zhang, Glass Transition in Monolayers of Rough Col-
loidal Ellipsoids, Physical Review Letters 134, 038202
(2025).
[37] D. Zhou, F. Wang, B. Li, X. Lou, and Y. Han, Glassy
Spin Dynamics in Geometrically Frustrated Buckled Col-
loidal Crystals, Physical Review X 7, 021030 (2017).
[38] A. Del Campo and W. H. Zurek, Universality of phase
transition dynamics: Topological defects from symmetry
breaking, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1430018 (2014).
