Clear
Lake
§¨¦
80
£
101
£
101
U
128
U
1
U
128
U
29
Napa
Sonoma
Petaluma
Calistoga
Sebastopol
Sebastopol
Santa
Rosa
Healdsburg
Cloverdale
Cloverdale
Guerneville
123°
38°
45'
38°
30'
38°
15'
PACIFIC
OCEAN
San Pablo
Bay
38°
U
29
Lake
Berryessa
122°15'
Rohnert
Park
0
10 MILES
5
0
10 KILOMETERS
5
Base modified from U.S. Geological Survey and other Federal and State 
digital data, various scales; Albers Equal-Area Conic projection, standard 
parallels are 29°30' N. and 45°30' N.; North American Datum of 1983
North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit boundary
North San Francisco Bay Public-Supply Aquifer study unit 
   boundary (Kulongoski and others, 2006)
EXPLANATION
Valleys and Plains study area
Highlands study area
U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Geological Survey
Fact Sheet 2018–3007
February 2018
U.S. Geological Survey and the California State Water Resources Control Board
Groundwater Quality in the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer, California 

Groundwater provides more than 40 percent of California’s drinking water. To protect this vital resource, 
the State of California created the Groundwater Ambient Monitoring and Assessment (GAMA) Program. 
The Priority Basin Project of the GAMA Program provides a comprehensive assessment of the State’s ground­
water quality and increases public access to groundwater-quality information. The North San Francisco Bay 
Shallow Aquifer constitutes one of the study units being evaluated. 
Overview of Water Quality
The North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer 
Study Unit
The North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit covers over 1,800 square 
miles near the coast in Central California. The study unit consists of 6 groundwater basins, 
some of which have multiple subbasins (California Department of Water Resources, 2003), 
as well as the surrounding highland terranes and is split into two study areas (Bennett and 
Fram, 2014). Alluvial-filled valleys in the study unit were combined to form the Valleys and 
Plains study area. Volcanic, metamorphic, and ultramafic hardrock highlands surrounding the 
Valleys and Plains form the Highlands study area. 
deep. Water quality in the shallow aquifer system can differ from that in the deeper public-
supply aquifer system.
The study unit has warm, dry summers and cool, moist winters. Average annual rainfall 
is about 30 inches. The study unit is drained by several rivers and streams along with 
their principal tributaries. Land use in the study unit is approximately 73 percent natural 
(forest, grasslands, and bare rock), 16 percent urban, and 11 percent agricultural. Primary 
agricultural uses include pasture, vineyards, flower nurseries, and orchards (Bennett, 2018). 
The largest urban areas are the cities of Santa Rosa, Petaluma, Rohnert Park, and Napa.
Recharge to the groundwater system is primarily by stream-channel infiltration from 
the major rivers and their tributaries and by infiltration of precipitation. The primary sources 
of discharge are water pumped for municipal supply, evaporation, and discharge to streams.
GAMA’s Priority Basin Project 
evaluates the quality of untreated 
groundwater. For context, however, 
benchmarks established for drinking- 
water quality are used for comparison. 
Benchmarks and definitions of high, 
moderate, and low concentrations are 
discussed in the inset box “Benchmarks 
for Evaluating Groundwater Quality” on 
page 3.
Many inorganic constituents 
are naturally in groundwater. The 
concentrations of the inorganic 
constituents can be affected by natural 
processes as well as by human activities. 
In the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer study unit, one or more inorganic 
constituents were present at high 
concentrations in about 27 percent of 
the shallow aquifers and at moderate 
concentrations in about 21 percent.
Man-made organic constituents 
are found in products used in the home, 
business, industry, and agriculture. 
Organic constituents can enter the 
environment through normal usage, spills, 
or improper disposal. In this study unit, 
organic constituents were present at high 
concentrations in about 1 percent of the 
shallow aquifer system, but were not 
present at moderate concentrations.
ISSN 2327-6916 (print)
ISSN 2327-6932 (online)
https://doi.org/10.3133/fs20183007
High
Moderate
CONSTITUENT CONCENTRATIONS
Low or not detected 
Values are a percentage of the area of the groundwater 
resources used for domestic drinking water with 
concentrations in the three specified categories.
Organic
constituents
Inorganic
constituents
99
1
52
21
27
The shallow aquifer system 
in the study unit is defined as 
those parts of the aquifer system 
shallower than the perforation 
intervals for public-supply wells 
used in the deeper public-supply 
aquifer system (Bennett, 2018). An 
assessment of the deeper public-
supply aquifer system was done 
by Kulongoski and others (2010). 
Sampled wells in the shallow 
aquifer system ranged from 22 to 
755 feet deep and were typically 
constructed using solid casings 
that extended below land surface 
to open or perforated intervals that 
ranged between 8 and 550 feet 
                     
     
INORGANIC CONSTITUENTS
RESULTS: Groundwater Quality in the North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer Study Unit
Inorganic Constituents with Human-Health Benchmarks
Trace and minor elements are naturally present in the minerals in rocks and 
soils and in the water that comes into contact with those materials. In the North 
San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit, trace elements were present at high 
concentrations in about 25 percent of the shallow aquifer system and at moderate 
concentrations in about 21 percent. Arsenic, boron, fluoride, and manganese were the 
trace elements detected at high concentrations.
Radioactivity is the release of energy or energetic particles during spontaneous 
decay of unstable atoms. Most of the radioactivity in groundwater comes from 
the decay of naturally present isotopes of uranium and thorium in minerals in the 
sediments of the aquifer. Radon-222, which primarily poses a threat to indoor air 
quality as a gas, was the only radioactive constituent present at high concentrations 
(2 samples). Because the danger posed by radon-222 is based on its concentrations in 
air, it is not represented in the pie chart for radioactive constituents. 
Nutrients, such as nitrogen, are naturally present at low concentrations in 
groundwater. High and moderate concentrations generally are a result of human 
activities, such as applying fertilizer to crops and landscaping, seepage from septic 
systems, and human and animal waste. In the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer study unit, nutrients were detected at high concentrations in about 2 percent 
of the shallow aquifer system and were present at moderate concentrations in about 
3 percent.
Perchlorate
Perchlorate is an inorganic constituent that has been regulated in California 
drinking water since 2007. It is used in solid rocket fuel, fireworks, safety flares, and 
is present in some fertilizers.  Perchlorate exists naturally at low concentrations in 
groundwater and was detected at moderate concentrations in about 3 percent of the 
shallow aquifer system.
Inorganic Constituents with Non-Health Benchmarks
(Not included in water-quality overview charts shown on the front page)
Some constituents affect the aesthetic properties of water, such as taste, color, 
and odor, or can create nuisance problems, such as staining and scaling. The State 
of California has a recommended and an upper limit for total dissolved solids (TDS) 
in drinking water. All water naturally contains TDS as a result of the weathering 
and dissolution of minerals in soils. Individual major ions that contribute to TDS 
concentrations include sulfate and chloride. The trace element iron exists naturally 
in minerals in rocks and soils. Anoxic conditions (very low amounts of dissolved 
oxygen) in groundwater can result in release of iron from minerals into groundwater 
(Hem, 1985).
In the North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit, TDS or the major 
ions chloride and sulfate were present at high concentrations (greater than the upper 
limit) in about 6 percent of the shallow aquifer system and at moderate concentra­
tions (between the recommended and upper limit) in about 16 percent. Iron was 
present at high concentrations in about 20 percent of the shallow aquifer system and 
at moderate concentrations in about 5 percent.
54
21
25
95
3
2
Nutrients
75
5
20
Iron
78
16
6
Major ions and TDS
100
Radioactive constituents
Trace elements
97
3
Perchlorate
ORGANIC CONSTITUENTS
RESULTS: Groundwater Quality in the North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer Study Unit
Organic Constituents
The GAMA Priority Basin Project uses laboratory methods that can detect low con­
centrations of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and pesticides, far below human-health 
benchmarks. VOCs and pesticides detected at these very low concentrations can be used to 
help trace water from the landscape into the aquifer system.
Volatile Organic Compounds with Human-Health Benchmarks
VOCs are in many household, commercial, industrial, and agricultural products and 
are characterized by a tendency to volatilize (evaporate) into the air. VOCs include solvents, 
trihalomethanes, refrigerants, and organic synthesis reagents. In the North San Francisco 
Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit, VOCs were at low concentrations when detected and were 
not present at high or moderate concentrations in the shallow aquifer system.   
Pesticides with Human-Health Benchmarks
Pesticides, including herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, and fumigants, are applied to 
crops, gardens, lawns, around buildings, and along roads to help control unwanted veg­
etation (weeds), insects, fungi, and other pests. In the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer study unit, pesticides were detected at high concentrations in about 1 percent of the 
shallow aquifer system, but none were detected at moderate concentrations. The insecticide 
dieldrin was the only pesticide detected at a high concentration. 
BENCHMARKS FOR EVALUATING GROUNDWATER QUALITY
GAMA’s Priority Basin Project uses benchmarks established 
for drinking water to provide context for evaluating the quality of 
groundwater. The quality of drinking water can differ from the quality 
of groundwater because of contact with household plumbing, exposure 
to the atmosphere, or water treatment. Federal and California regulatory 
benchmarks for protecting human health (maximum contaminant level, 
MCL) were used when available. Otherwise, non-regulatory benchmarks 
for protecting human health (lifetime health advisory level, HAL, and 
notification level, NL) and nonregulatory benchmarks for protecting 
aesthetic properties, such as taste and odor (secondary maximum 
contaminant level, SMCL) were used.
Benchmark type and value for selected constituents.
[Constituents are listed in the order in which they are discussed in this fact sheet. Benchmark types: California, State Water Resources Control Board Division 
of Drinking Water; Federal, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; HAL, lifetime health advisory level; MCL, maximum contaminant level; RSD5, risk-specific 
dose at a risk factor of 10-5; SMCL, secondary maximum contaminant level. Abbreviations: ppb, parts per billion or micrograms per liter; ppm, parts per million or 
milligrams per liter; pCi/L, picocuries per liter]
Constituent
Benchmark
Constituent
Benchmark
Type
Value
Type
Value
Arsenic
Federal MCL
10 ppb
Perchlorate
California MCL
6 ppb
Boron
Federal HAL
6,000 ppb
Total dissolved solids (TDS)
California SMCL
1,000 ppm
Fluoride
California MCL
2 ppm
Chloride
California SMCL
500 ppm
Manganese
Federal HAL
300 ppb
Sulfate
California SMCL
500 ppm
Radon-222
Proposed Federal MCL
4,000 pCi/L
Iron
California SMCL
300 ppb
Nitrate
Federal MCL
10 ppm
Dieldrin
Federal RSD5
0.02 ppb
High, moderate, and low concentrations are defined relative to benchmarks
Concentrations are considered high if they are greater than a benchmark. For inorganic constituents, concentrations are moderate 
if they are greater than one-half of a benchmark. For organic and special-interest constituents, concentrations are moderate if they 
are greater than one-tenth of a benchmark. Low concentrations include non-detections and values less than moderate concentrations. 
Methods for evaluating water quality are discussed by Bennett and Fram (2014).
High: Concentrations are greater than the
   benchmark
Moderate: Concentrations are less than
   the benchmark, but greater than one-half 
   (for inorganic constituents) or one-tenth 
   (for organic constituents) of the benchmark
Low: Concentrations are less than moderate 
   or the constituent was not detected
Pie diagrams are used to summarize groundwater-quality
results. The pie slices represent the percentages of the  
groundwater resources with high, moderate, and low 
concentrations of a constituent.  Methods for calculating 
these percentages are discussed by Bennett (2018).
100
Pesticides
Volatile organic
compounds
100
99
1
ISSN 2327-6916 (print)
ISSN 2327-6932 (online)
http://dx.doi.org/10.3133/fsxxxxxxxx
Priority Basin Assessments 
GAMA’s Priority Basin Project 
(GAMA-PBP) assesses water quality in 
two distinct parts of the aquifer system 
used for drinking water: the public-
supply aquifer system and the shallow 
aquifer system. The public-supply 
aquifer system is defined by the depths 
of public-supply wells. The shallow 
aquifer system is defined as that portion 
of the aquifer system shallower than the 
public-supply wells. Domestic wells 
are often in the shallow aquifer system. 
Assessments are ongoing in more than 
120 basins throughout California. 
The GAMA-PBP assessments are 
based on a comparison of constituent 
concentrations in untreated groundwater 
with benchmarks established for the 
protection of human health and for 
aesthetic concerns. The GAMA-PBP 
does not evaluate the quality of drinking 
water delivered to consumers. 
The GAMA-PBP uses two scientific 
approaches for assessing groundwater 
quality. The first approach uses a 
network of wells to statistically assess 
the status of groundwater quality. The 
second approach combines water-quality, 
hydrologic, geographic, and other data to 
help assess the factors that affect water 
quality. In the North San Francisco Bay 
Shallow Aquifer study unit, data were 
collected by the GAMA-PBP in 2012. 
The GAMA-PBP includes chemical 
analyses not generally available 
as part of regulatory compliance 
monitoring, including measurements at 
concentrations much lower than human-
health benchmarks and measurement of 
constituents that can be used to trace the 
sources and movement of groundwater.
For more information
Technical reports and hydrologic data 
collected for the GAMA Program may be 
obtained from: 
GAMA Project Chief
U.S. Geological Survey
California Water Science Center
6000 J Street, Placer Hall
Sacramento, CA 95819
Telephone number: (916) 278-3000
WEB: http://ca.water.usgs.gov/gama
GAMA Program Unit Chief
State Water Resources Control Board
Division of Water Quality 
PO Box 2231, Sacramento, CA 95812
Telephone number: (916) 341-5779
WEB: 
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/gama
By George L. Bennett V and Miranda Fram
REFERENCES CITED
Bennett, G.L., V, 2018, Status and understanding of groundwater quality in the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer study unit, 2012; California GAMA Priority Basin Project (ver. 1.1, February 2018): U.S. Geological 
Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2017–5051, 74 p., https://doi.org/10.3133/sir20175051.
Bennett, G.L., V, and Fram, M.S., 2014, Groundwater-quality data in the North San Francisco Bay Shallow 
Aquifer study unit, 2012—Results from the California GAMA Program: U.S. Geological Survey Data Series 
865, 94 p., https://doi.org/10.3133/ds865.
California Department of Water Resources, 2003, California’s groundwater: California Department of Water 
Resources Bulletin 118, 246 p., https://www.water.ca.gov/Programs/Groundwater-Management/Bulletin-118.
Forrest, M.J., Kulongoski, J.T., Edwards, M.S., Farrar, C.D., Belitz, K., and Norris, R.D., 2013, Hydrothermal 
contamination of public supply wells in Napa and Sonoma Valleys, California: Applied Geochemistry, v. 33, 
p. 25–40, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeochem.2013.01.012.
Hem, J.D., 1985, Study and interpretation of the chemical characteristics of natural water (3d ed.): U.S. Geologi­
cal Survey Water Supply Paper 2254, 263 p., http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/wsp2254.
Kulongoski, J.T., Belitz, Kenneth, and Dawson, B.J., 2006, Ground-water quality data in the North San Fran­
cisco Bay hydrologic provinces, California, 2004—Results from the Ground-Water Ambient Monitoring and 
Assessment (GAMA) Program: U.S. Geological Survey Data Series Report 167, 100 p., http://pubs.usgs.gov/
ds/ds167/. 
Kulongoski, J.T., Belitz, Kenneth, Landon, M.K., and Farrar, Christopher, 2010, Status and understanding of 
groundwater quality in the North San Francisco Bay groundwater basins, 2004—California GAMA Priority 
Basin Project: U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2010–5089, 88 p., http://pubs.usgs.
gov/sir/2010/5089/.
Smedley, P.L., and Kinniburgh, D.G., 2002, A review of the source, behaviour and distribution of arsenic in natu­
ral waters: Applied Geochemistry, v. 17, no. 5, p. 517–568, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-2927(02)00018-5.
Factors that Affect Groundwater Quality
In the North San Francisco Bay Shallow Aquifer study unit, trace elements such 
as arsenic, boron, fluoride and manganese were detected at high concentrations in about 
one-quarter of the aquifer system. Groundwater age and geochemical conditions in the aquifer 
are often related to trace-element concentrations. Arsenic concentration in the study unit, for 
example, exhibited relationships both to groundwater age and dissolved oxygen concetrations.
The highest concentrations of arsenic were in samples with low dissolved oxygen and 
premodern or mixed age groundwater. Arsenic can be released from iron or manganese 
oxyhydroxides under anoxic conditions (low dissolved oxygen), and the longer groundwater 
is in contact with aquifer materials that contain arsenic, the more time there is for chemicals to 
react (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002). Hydrothermal water, water heated by the Earth’s inter­
nal heat, is present in some areas of the study unit (Forrest and others, 2013). These waters can 
ascend along faults or the fracture zone and mix with groundwater, and because mineral solu­
bilities tend to increase with temperature, trace elements like arsenic, boron, and floride can 
become elevated (Forrest and others, 2013). Sites with the highest concentrations of arsenic 
in the North San Francisco Bay shallow aquifer study unit had slightly elevated groundwater 
temperatures, potentially indicating mixing with hydrothermal water (Bennett, 2018).
High
High
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low
Low
0
2
4
6
8
Dissolved oxygen concentration, milligrams per liter
0
10
20
30
40
50
Arsenic concentration, micrograms per liter
60
10
1
3
5
7
9
Highland
Modern
Mixed
Premodern
Valleys
and Plains
EXPLANATION
Anoxic Oxic
